PART II
3[DIRECTORATES-GENERAL]
4[228. The Directorate General of 5[ ] Internal Audit. — (1) The Directorate
General of 6[ ] Internal Audit shall consist of a Director-General and as many
Directors, Additional Directors, Deputy Directors and Assistant Directors and such
other officers as the Board, may by notification in the official Gazette, appoint.
(ii) a person holding a Pakistan origin card or a national identity card for overseas
Pakistanis 2[or a non-resident Pakistani citizen holding international passport] who
produces a certificate from a scheduled bank for receipt of foreign exchange
remitted from outside Pakistan through normal banking channels during a period of
sixty days prior to the date of registering, recording or attesting transfer.
New section 227D inserted through Finance Act, 2009.
Section 227BA inserted by the Finance Act, 2021.
The heading “DIRECTORATE-GENERAL OF INTERNAL AUDIT” substituted by the Finance Act, 2013.
Section 228 substituted by the Finance Act, 2005. The substituted section 228 read as follows:
“228. Appointment of Directorate-General of Inspection.- (1) The Federal Government shall
appoint a Directorate-General of Inspection to exercise the powers and discharge the functions
conferred on it under this Part.
(2) The Directorate-General shall consist of a Director-General and as many Directors,
Additional Directors, Deputy Directors, Assistant Directors, Extra-Assistant Directors and Inspectors,
as the Director-General may consider necessary to be appointed from among the officers of the
Income Tax Group.”
The words “Inspection and” omitted by the Finance Act, 2007.
The words “Inspection and” omitted by the Finance Act, 2007.
(2) The Board may, by notification in the official Gazette, specify the
functions, jurisdiction and powers of the Directorate General of 1[ ] Internal Audit.]
2[229. 3[Inland Revenue Service Academy].— (1) The 4[Inland Revenue Service
Academy] shall consist of a Director-General, Additional Director-General and as
many Directors, Additional Directors, Deputy Directors, Assistant Directors and
such officers as the Board, may, by notification in the official Gazette, appoint.
(2) The Board may, by notification in the official Gazette, specify the
functions, jurisdiction and powers of the 5[Inland Revenue Service Academy] and
its officers.]
6[230. Directorate General (Intelligence and Investigation), Inland Revenue.—(1)
The Directorate General (Intelligence and Investigation) Inland Revenue shall
consist of a Director General and as many Directors, Additional Directors, Deputy
Directors and Assistant Directors and such other officers as the Board, may by
notification in the official Gazette, appoint.
(2) The Board may, by notification in the official Gazette,—
(a) specify the functions and jurisdiction of the Directorate General
and its officers; and
(b) confer the powers of authorities specified in section 207 upon
the Directorate General and its officers.]
The words “Inspection and” omitted by the Finance Act, 2007.
Added by the Finance Act, 2010. Earlier section 229 was omitted by the Finance Act, 2005. Which
read as follows:-
“229. Inspection authorities.- (1) There shall be the following classes of inspection authorities for
the purposes of this Ordinance, namely:-
(a) The Director-General of Inspection; and
(b) Directors of Inspection.
(2) The Directors of Inspection shall be subordinate to the Director-General of Inspection.”
The words “Directorate General of Training and Research” substituted by the Finance Act, 2022.
The words “Directorate General of Training and Research” substituted by the Finance Act, 2022.
The words “Directorate General of Training and Research” substituted by the Finance Act, 2022.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2012. Earlier it was omitted by the Finance Act, 2005, which read as
follows:-
“230. Jurisdiction of Inspection Authorities.- (1) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, the
Directors of Inspection shall perform their functions in respect of such persons or classes of persons
or such areas as may be assigned to them by the Director-General.
(2) The Director-General or a Director of Inspection may assign any function in respect of any
area, or office or offices located within an area, case, class of cases, person or classes of persons
to any inspection officer working under his control.
(3) In this section, “inspection officer” means an Additional Director of Inspection, a Deputy
Director of Inspection, an Assistant Director and an Extra-Assistant Director.”
[PART III
2[DIRECTORATES-GENERAL]
230A. Directorate-General of Withholding Taxes.— (1) The Directorate-General of
Withholding Taxes shall consist of a Director General and as many Directors,
Additional Directors, Deputy Directors and Assistant Directors and such other
officers as the Board, may by notification in the official Gazette, appoint.
(2) The Board may, by notification in the official Gazette, specify the
functions, jurisdiction and powers of the Directorate-General of Withholding Taxes.]
3[230B. Directorate-General of Law.— The Directorate-General of Law shall
consist of a Director General and as many Directors, Additional Directors, Deputy
Directors, Assistant Directors, Law Officers and such other officers as the Board
may, by notification in the official Gazette, appoint.
(2) The Board may, by notification in the official Gazette, specify the
functions, jurisdiction and powers of the Directorate-General of Law.]
4[230C. Directorate-General of Research and Development.— (1) The
Directorate-General of Research and Development shall consist of a Director
General and as many Directors, Additional Directors, Deputy Directors, Assistant
Directors and such other officers as the Board may, by notification in the official
Gazette, appoint.
(2) The Board may, by notification in the official Gazette, specify the
functions, jurisdiction and powers of the Directorate-General of Research and
Development.]
5[230D. Directorate-General of Broadening of Tax Base.— (1) The Directorate-
General of Broadening of Tax Base shall consist of a Director-General and as
many Directors, Additional Directors, Deputy Directors, Assistant Directors and
such other officers as the Board may, by notification in the official Gazette, appoint.
(2) The Board may, by notification in the official Gazette, specify the
functions, jurisdiction and powers of the Directorate-General of Broadening of Tax
Base.]
Added by the Finance Act, 2008.
The heading “DIRECTORATE-GENERAL OF WITHHOLDING TAXES” substituted by the Finance
Act, 2013.
Added by the Finance Act, 2013.
Added by the Finance Act, 2013.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2017.
1[230E Directorate General of International 2[Tax] Operations.—(l) The
Directorate General of international Tax Operations shall consist of a Director
General and as many Directors, Additional Directors, Deputy Directors, Assistant
Directors and such other officers as the Board may, by notification in the official
Gazette, appoint.
(2) The Board may, by notification in the official Gazette,
(a) specify the functions and jurisdiction of the Directorate General
and its officers; and
(b) confer the powers of authorities specified in section 207 upon the
Directorate General and its officers.
(3) The functions and powers of the Directorate General of International Tax
Operations shall include but not limited to-
(a) receive and send information from other jurisdictions under
spontaneous, automatic and on demand exchange of information
under exchange of information agreements;
(b) levy and recover tax by passing an assessment order under
section I23(1A) in case of undeclared off-shore assets and
incomes;
(c) receive, transmit and exchange country reports to the jurisdictions
that are parties to international by country agreements with
Pakistan; and
(d) conduct transfer pricing audit in cases selected for such audit by
the Director General of international Tax Operations.
(4) The Board may, by notification in the official Gazette, specify the criteria
for selection of the taxpayer for transfer pricing audit.
1[230E. Directorate-General of Transfer Pricing.— (1) The Directorate-General of Transfer Pricing
shall consist of a Director-General and as many Directors, Additional Directors, Deputy Directors,
Assistant Directors and such other officers as the Board may, by notification in the official Gazette,
appoint.
(2) The functions of the Directorate General of Transfer Pricing shall be to conduct transfer
pricing audit.
Explanation: For the removal of doubt, it is clarified that transfer pricing audit refers to
the audit for determination of transfer price at arm's length in transactions between associates
and is independent of audit under section 177, 214C or 214D which is audit of the income tax
affairs of the taxpayer.
(3) The Board may, by notification in the official Gazette, specify the criteria for selection of
the taxpayer for transfer pricing audit and may further specify functions, jurisdiction and powers of the
Directorate-General of Transfer Pricing.]
2 The word “Tar” substituted by the Finance Act, 2019.
Explanation- For the removal of doubt, it is clarified that transfer pricing audit
refers to the audit for determination of transfer price at arm's length in
transactions between associates and is independent tax audit under section
177 and 2l4C which is audit of the income tax affairs of the taxpayer.
1[(5) Transfer pricing audit of cases selected under clause (d) of sub-
section (3) shall be conducted as per procedure given in section 177 and all the
provisions of the Ordinance, except the first proviso to sub-section (1), sub-section
(6A), (10) and (14) of section 177, shall apply accordingly.
(6) Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the Commissioner from
determination of transfer price at arm’s length in transactions between associates
while conducting audit of income tax affairs of a taxpayer under section 177 or
214C or during proceedings under section 122.]
2[230F. Directorate General of Immovable Property.—(1) The Directorate-
General of Immovable Property, (hereinafter referred to as Directorate-General in
this section, shall consist of a Director General and as many Directors, Additional
Directors, Deputy Directors and Assistant Directors and such other officers as the
Board may, by notification in the official Gazette, appoint.
(2) The Board may, by notification in the official Gazette, specify the
functions and jurisdiction of the Directorate-General and its officers.
(3) The Directorate-General may, subject to the provisions and conditions
as may be prescribed, initiate proceedings for the acquisition of property for the
reasons and purposes specified in sub-section (4).
(4) The proceedings under sub-section (3) shall be initiated, where the
Directorate-General, on the basis of valuation made by it, has reason to believe
that any immovable property of a fair market value has been transferred by a
person, hereinafter referred to as the transferor, to another person, hereinafter
referred to as the transferee, for a consideration which is less than the fair market
value of the immovable property and that the consideration for such transfer as
1 New sub-sections (5) & (6) inserted through Tax Law (Second Amendment) 2019, dated 26th
December, 2019
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2018.
agreed to between the transferor and transferee has been understated in the
instrument of transfer for the purposes of ─
(a) the avoidance or reduction of withholding tax obligations under
this Ordinance;
(b) concealment of unexplained amount referred to in sub- section
(1) of section 111 representing investment in immovable
property; or
(c) avoidance or reduction of capital gains tax under section 37.
(5) The Directorate-General may appoint any valuer or expert as it
considers necessary for the purposes of determination of valuation including fair
market value of immovable property.
(6) The mode and manner of appointment of a valuer or expert shall be
as may be prescribed.
(7) The valuation made under sub-section (4) and reasons that
consideration is less than the fair market value shall be recorded in writing.
(8) No proceedings shall be initiated in respect of any immovable property
after expiration of a period of six months from the end of the month in which the
instrument of transfer in respect of such property is registered, recorded or
attested.
(9) The mode and manner of initiation of proceedings and acquisition of
immovable property under this section shall be as may be prescribed:
Provided that the proceedings shall not be initiated unless the
transferee is provided with an opportunity of being heard and where the
objection by the transferee, if any, is rejected by the Directorate-General, it
shall record in writing the reasons for rejection through an order.
(10) If the Directorate-General is satisfied with the objections or reasons
furnished by the transferee or the transferor, it shall, by order in writing, declare
that the property shall not be acquired under this section.
(11) If after hearing the objections, if any, and after taking into account all
the relevant material on record, the Directorate-General is satisfied that the fair
market value of such property exceeds the consideration by more than fifty per
cent of such consideration and that transfer as agreed to between the transferor
and the transferee has not been truly stated in the instrument of transfer it may,
after obtaining approval of the Board, make an order for acquisition of the
immovable property under this section.
(12) The transferee may prefer express appeal to the Appellate Tribunal of
Immovable Property against the order of acquisition of any immovable property
under sub-section (11) within sixty days of service of a copy of such order.
(13) There shall be established an Appellate Tribunal of Immovable
Property to exercise the powers conferred on the Tribunal under this section.
(14) The appointment of members of the Tribunal, powers, functions,
constitution of the Tribunal and mode and manner of disposal of appeals shall be
as may be prescribed.
(15) The Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the appellant and the
Directorate-General an opportunity of being heard, pass such order as it thinks fit.
(16) The transferee or the Directorate-General aggrieved by any order of
the Tribunal may, within sixty days of the date on which the order under sub-section
(15) is served, prefer an appeal against such order to the High Court.
(17) As soon as may be after the order for acquisition of immovable
property made under sub-section (11) becomes final, the Directorate-General
may, by notice in writing, order the transferee or any other person who may be
in possession of the immovable property to surrender or deliver possession
thereof to the Directorate-General within thirty days of the date of the service of
the notice.
(18) The order referred to in sub-section (11) becomes final if either no
appeal has been there against filed or on appeal filed before the Tribunal, the order
is confirmed and no appeal is filed before the High Court or on appeal filed before
the High Court the order is confirmed.
(19) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law or any agreement for
the time being in force, where order referred to in sub-section (11) becomes final,
the immovable property and all rights including ownership rights thereof shall be
vested in the Federal Government and shall be treated to be in the same position
in relation to such rights as the person in whom such rights would have continued
to vest if such order had not become final.
(20) Where any immovable property is acquired under this section, the
Board shall make the payment of consideration for acquisition to the person or
persons entitled thereto, as soon as may be, after the property becomes vested in
the Federal Government.
(21) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 68, for the purpose of this
section,—
(a) “consideration for acquisition” means a sum equal to the aggregate of
the amount of the consideration for the transfer of immovable
property and hundred per cent of such consideration;
(b) “fair market value” in relation to an immovable property means the
price that the immovable property would ordinarily fetch on sale in the
open market on the date of execution of the instrument of transfer of
such property;
(c) "immovable property" means any land with or without a superstructure
or any building or part of a building or any rights therein and includes,
where any land or any building or part of a building is transferred
along with any machinery, plant, equipment, furniture and fittings;
and
(d) "transfer" in relation to any immovable property means transfer of
such property by way of sale or exchange or lease for a term of not
less than ten years.
(22) The provisions of this section shall come into force on such date as
the Federal Government may, by notification in official Gazette, appoint.
1[ ]
2[230G. Directorate General of Special Initiative.- (1) The Directorate General
of Special Initiative shall consist of a Director General and as many Directors,
Additional Directors, Deputy Directors, Assistant Directors and such other officers
as the Board may, by notification in the official Gazette, appoint.
(2) The Board may, by notification in the official Gazette,-
1In section 230F, sub-section (23) omitted through Finance Act 2019, omitted sub-section read as
follows:
(23) From the date of appointment as mentioned in sub-section (22), rates mentioned in column
(3) of the Table in Division XVIII shall be 1% and provisions of clause (c) of sub-section (4) of
section 111, section 236C, section 236W and Division X of Part IV of the First Schedule shall not
apply.
New section (230G) & (230H) inserted through Finance Act, 2019.
(a) specify the functions, jurisdiction and powers of the Directorate General
of Special Initiative and its officers; and
(b) confer the powers of authorities specified in section 207 upon the
Directorate General and its officers.
230H. Directorate General of Valuation.- (1) The Directorate General of
Valuation shall consist of a Director General and as many Directors, Additional
Directors, Deputy Directors, Assistant Directors and such other officers as the
Board may, by notification in the official Gazette, appoint.
(2) The Board may, by notification in the official Gazette,-
(a) specify the functions, jurisdiction and powers of the Directorate General
of Valuation and its officers; and
(b) confer the powers authorities specified in section 207 upon the
Directorate General and its officers.]
1[230I. Directorate General of Compliance Risk Management.— (1) The
Directorate General of Compliance Risk Management shall consist of a Director
General and as many Directors, Additional Directors, Deputy Directors, Assistant
Directors and such other officers as the Board may, by notification in the official
Gazette, appoint.
(2) The Board may, by notification in the official Gazette —
(a) specify the functions, jurisdiction and powers of the Directorate General
of Compliance Risk Management and its officers; and
(b) confer the powers of authorities specified in section 207 upon the
Directorate General and its officers.]
2[230J. International Centre of Tax Excellence. – (1) There shall be established
an Institute to be known as International Centre of Tax Excellence.
(2) The functions of the Institute shall be to help contribute to the
development of tax policy, prepare model national tax policy, deliver inter-
disciplinary research in tax administration and policy, international tax cooperation,
revenue forecasting, conduct international seminars, workshops and conferences
on the current issues faced by tax authorities in the field of international taxation,
capacity building of Inland Revenue Officers, tax analysis, improve the design and
delivery of tax administration for maximising revenue within existing provisions to
Section 230I inserted by the Finance Act, 2021.
Section 230J inserted by the Finance Act 2023.
close the tax gap or any other function as directed by the Board or the Federal
Government.
(3) There shall be a Nominating Committee comprising the Minister-in-
Charge, Secretary Revenue Division and Secretary Finance which shall be
responsible for recommending a panel to the Federal Government for the
appointment of an Executive Director and independent members of the Executive
Committee.
(4) There shall an Executive Committee comprising Chairman, Federal
Board of Revenue, Member (IR-Policy), Member (IR-Operations) and two
independent members to be appointed by the Federal Government. Executive
Director shall act as Secretary of the Executive Committee.
(5) The Nominating Committee shall apply the prescribed criteria for
making recommendations of the panel for Executive Director and independent
members of the Executive Committee.
(6) Executive Director and independent members of the Executive
Committee shall be appointed by the Federal Government.
(7) Executive Director shall also be the Chief Executive of the Institute
and shall work to ensure efficient functioning and day to day administrative
functions of the Institute and shall be independent in the discharge of its functions
specified under sub-section (8).
(8) Executive Committee, for every fiscal year, shall assign the
requirements of the Board to be undertaken by the Institute, during the year.
(9) The Executive Committee shall prescribe rules for recruitment of the
employees of the Institute and Executive Director shall act in accordance with the
rules. At least fifty per cent of the employees shall be serving Inland Revenue
officers having at least 5 years of experience of tax policy or tax administration.
(10) The remuneration and term of employment of the employees of the
Institute shall be as prescribed by the Federal Government.
(11) The Board may establish a committee to monitor the establishment of
the Institute including appointment of the Project Director for the purpose.
(12) The Board may, provide such data to the Institute as is necessary for
processing and analysis and for discharging its obligations under sub-section (8):
Provided that such data shall be anonymized before transmission to
the Institute and identifying particulars of the taxpayers shall be kept
confidential and provisions of sub-section (7) of section 216 shall apply
accordingly.
(13) The Executive Committee may by notification in the official gazette
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this section.]
1[230K. Tax Fraud Investigation Wing Inland Revenue. – (1) There shall be
established a wing to be known as Tax Fraud Investigation Wing Inland Revenue.
(2) The functions of the Tax Fraud Investigation Wing Inland Revenue
shall be to detect, analyze, investigate, combat and prevent tax evasion and fraud.
(3) The Tax Fraud Investigation Wing Inland Revenue shall comprise
Fraud Intelligence and Analysis Unit, Fraud Investigation Unit, Legal Unit,
Accountants Unit, Digital Forensic and Scene of Crime Unit, Administrative Unit or
any other Unit as may be approved by the Board or the Federal Government.
(4) The Tax Fraud Investigation Wing Inland Revenue shall consist of a
Chief Investigator and as many following officers, as may be notified by the Board
–
(a) Senior Investigators, Investigators, Junior Investigators or any
other officer of Inland Revenue with any other designation;
(b) a Senior Forensic Analyst and as many Forensic Analysts and
Junior Forensic Analysts; and
(c) a Senior Data Analyst and as many Data Analysts and Junior
Data Analysts.
(5) The Board may, by notification in the official Gazette, -
(a) specify the functions and jurisdiction of the Tax Fraud
Investigation Wing Inland Revenue and its officers; and
(b) confer the powers of authorities specified in section 207 upon
the Tax Fraud Investigation Wing Inland Revenue and its
officers in clause (a) of sub-section 4.
(6) Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the authorities
appointed under sections 207 and 208 or any other authority or officer conferred
with the power of authorities under sections 207 and 208 from conducting
prosecution Part XI of Chapter X of the Ordinance.]
Section 230K inserted by the Finance Act 2024.
1[ ]
Section 231 omitted by the Finance Act, 2005. The omitted section 231 read as follows:
“231. Functions and Powers of Directorate.- (1) The functions of the Directorate-General of
Inspection shall be, namely:-
(a) To carry out inspections of income tax cases and offices;
(b) to investigate or cause investigation to be carried out in respect of –
(i) cases involving leakage of revenue or evasion of taxes; and
(ii) Regional Commissioners of Income Tax, Commissioners of Income Tax, taxation
officers and any other staff of income tax offices allegedly involved in corruption and
malpractice, and recommend to the competent authority appropriate disciplinary action;
(c) to carry out audit of cases or offices involving income tax revenues;
(d) to recommend to the Central Board of Revenue in matters of tax policy, tax administration
and tax operations;
(e) to furnish an annual report about the workings of Income Tax Offices to the Central Board
of Revenue by the thirty-first day of December, following the end of the financial year to
which it relates; and
(f) to carry out any other work or function that may be assigned to it by the Federal
Government.
(2) In discharge of its functions under sub-section (1), the Directorate-General shall have
the powers specified in section 176.”
