Division III
Deductions: Special Provisions
22. Depreciation.— (1) Subject to this section, a person shall be allowed a
deduction for the depreciation of the person’s depreciable assets used in the
person’s business in the tax year 3[:
Provided that the depreciation expense shall not be allowed for the
amount paid for addition of capital assets to a seller in all relevant tax years
if the tax deductible under sections 152 or 153 of the Ordinance in respect
of those payments has not been deducted and deposited in the treasury, by
not adding such amount paid for addition in capital assets in the assets for
computation of tax depreciation.]
(2) Subject to 4[sub-section] (3) 5[ ], the depreciation deduction for a tax year
shall be computed by applying the rate specified in Part I of the Third Schedule against
the written down value of the asset at the beginning of the year 6[ ] 7[.]
8[ ]
(3) Where a depreciable asset is used in a tax year partly in deriving
income from business chargeable to tax and partly for another use, the deduction
allowed under this section for that year shall be restricted to the fair proportional
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2025.
Clause (s) inserted by the Finance Act, 2025.
Full stop substituted by colon and thereafter the new proviso added by the Finance Act, 2025.
The word “sub-sections” substituted by the Finance Act, 2005.
The word, brackets and figure “and (4)” omitted by Finance Act, 2004.
Full stop substituted by colon and thereafter the new proviso added through Finance Act, 2020
dated 30th June, 2020
Colon substituted by the Finance Act, 2025.
Proviso omitted by the Finance Act, 2022. The omitted proviso read as follows:
“Provided that where a depreciable asset is used in the person’s business for the first
time in a tax year commencing on or after the 1st day of July, 2020, the depreciation deduction
shall be reduced by fifty percent.”
part of the amount that would be allowed if the asset 1[was] wholly used to 2[derive]
income from business chargeable to tax.
3[ ]
(5) The written down value of a depreciable asset of a person at the
beginning of the tax year shall be —
(a) where the asset was acquired in the tax year, the cost of the
asset to the person as reduced by any initial allowance in
respect of the asset under section 23; or
(b) in any other case, the cost of the asset to the person as reduced
by the total depreciation deductions (including any initial
allowance under section 23) allowed to the person in respect of
the asset in previous tax years.
4[Explanation,- For the removal of doubt, it is clarified that where any
building, furniture, plant or machinery is used for the purposes of
business during any tax year for which the income from such business
is exempt, depreciation admissible under sub-section (1) shall be
treated to have been allowed in respect of the said tax year and after
expiration of the exemption period, written down value of such assets
shall be determined after reducing total depreciation deductions
(including any initial allowance under section 23) in accordance with
clauses (a) and (b) of this sub-section.]
(6) Where sub-section (3) applies to a depreciable asset for a tax year,
the written down value of the asset shall be computed on the basis that the asset
has been solely used to derive income from business chargeable to tax.
(7) The total deductions allowed to a person during the period of
ownership of a depreciable asset under this section and section 23 shall not
exceed the cost of the asset.
The word “were” substituted by the Finance Act, 2010.
The word “derived” substituted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Sub-section (4) omitted by the Finance Act, 2004. The omitted sub-section (4) reads as follows:
“(4) Where a depreciable asset is not used for the whole of the tax year in deriving income
from business chargeable to tax, the deduction allowed under this section shall be computed
according to the following formula, namely:–
A x B/C
where –
A is the amount of depreciation computed under sub-section (2) or (3), as the case may be;
B is the number of months in the tax year the asset is used in deriving income from business
chargeable to tax; and
C is the number of months in the tax year.”
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2016.
(8) Where, in any tax year, a person disposes of a depreciable asset, no
depreciation deduction shall be allowed under this section for that year and —
(a) if the consideration received exceeds the written down value of
the asset at the time of disposal, the excess shall be chargeable
to tax in that year under the head “Income from Business”; or
(b) if the consideration received is less than the written down value of
the asset at the time of disposal, the difference shall be allowed as
a deduction in computing the person’s income chargeable under
the head “Income from Business” for that year 1[:]
2[ ]
(9) Where sub-section (3) applies, the written down value of the asset for
the purposes of sub-section (8) shall be increased by the amount that is not
allowed as a deduction as a result of the application of sub-section (3).
(10) Where clause (a) of sub-section (13) applies, the 3[consideration
received on disposal] of the passenger transport vehicle for the purposes of sub-
section (8) shall be computed according to the following formula —
A x B/C
where –
A is the 4[amount] received on disposal of the vehicle;
B is the amount referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (13); and
C is the actual cost of acquiring the vehicle.
(11) Subject to sub-sections (13) and (14), the rules in Part III of Chapter IV
shall apply in determining the cost and consideration received in respect of a
depreciable asset for the purposes of this section.
5[(12) The depreciation deductions allowed to a leasing company or an
investment bank or a modaraba or a scheduled bank or a development finance
Full stop substituted by colon and thereafter the new proviso added through Finance Act, 2020
dated 30th June, 2020
Proviso omitted by the Finance Act, 2022. The omitted proviso read as follows:
“Provided that where a depreciable asset is used in the person’s business for the first time in
a tax year commencing on or after the 1st day of July, 2020, depreciation deduction equal to fifty
percent of the rate specified in Part I of the Third Schedule shall be allowed in the year of disposal.”.
The words “written down value” substituted by the Finance Act, 2004.
The word “consideration” substituted by the Finance Act, 2004.
Sub-section (12) substituted by the Finance Act, 2002. The substituted sub-section (12) read as
follows:
“(12) The depreciation deductions allowed to a leasing company in respect of assets owned
by the company and leased to another person shall be deductible only against the lease rental
income derived in respect of such assets.”
institution in respect of assets owned by the leasing company or an investment
bank or a modaraba or a scheduled bank or a development finance institution and
leased to another person shall be deductible only against the lease rental income
derived in respect of such assets.]
(13) For the purposes of this section, —
(a) the cost of a depreciable asset being a passenger transport
vehicle not plying for hire shall not exceed 1[seven and a half]
million rupees;
2[ ]
(b) the cost of immovable property or a structural improvement to
immovable property shall not include the cost of the land;
3[(c) any asset owned by a leasing company or an investment bank
or a modaraba or a scheduled bank or a development finance
institution and leased to another person is treated as used in the
leasing company or the investment bank or the modaraba or the
scheduled bank or the development finance institution’s
business; and]
(d) where the consideration received on the disposal of immovable
property exceeds the cost of the property, the consideration
received shall be treated as the cost of the property.
(14) Where a depreciable asset that has been used by a person in Pakistan
is exported or transferred out of Pakistan, the person shall be treated as having
disposed of the asset at the time of the export or transfer for a consideration
received equal to the cost of the asset.
(15) In this section, —
“depreciable asset” means any tangible movable property, immovable
property (other than unimproved land), or structural improvement to
immovable property, owned by a person that —
(a) has a normal useful life exceeding one year;
1 The expression “1[two]1[and half]” substituted by the Finance Act, 2022.
Proviso omitted by the Finance Act, 2009. The omitted proviso read as follows:
“Provided that the prescribed limit of one million rupees shall not apply to passenger transport
vehicles, not plying for hire, acquired on or after the first day of July, 2005.”
Clause (c) substituted by the Finance Act, 2002. The substituted clause read as follows:
“(c) an asset owned by a financial institution or leasing company and leased to another person
is treated as used in the financial institution or leasing company’s business; and”.
(b) is likely to lose value as a result of normal wear and tear, or
obsolescence; and
(c) is used wholly or partly by the person in deriving income from
business chargeable to tax,
but shall not include any tangible movable property, immovable
property, or structural improvement to immovable property in relation
to which a deduction has been allowed under another section of this
Ordinance for the entire cost of the property or improvement in the tax
year in which the property is acquired or improvement made by the
person; and
“structural improvement” in relation to immovable property, includes
any building, road, driveway, car park, railway line, pipeline, bridge,
tunnel, airport runway, canal, dock, wharf, retaining wall, fence, power
lines, water or sewerage pipes, drainage, landscaping or dam1[:]
2[Provided that where a depreciable asset is jointly owned by a
taxpayer and an Islamic financial institution licensed by the State Bank
of Pakistan or Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan, as
the case may be, pursuant to an arrangement of Musharika financing
or diminishing Musharika financing, the depreciable asset shall be
treated to be wholly owned by the taxpayer.]
23. Initial allowance.—(1) A person who places an eligible depreciable asset
into service in Pakistan for the first time in a tax year shall be allowed a deduction
(hereinafter referred to as an “initial allowance”) computed in accordance with sub-
section (2), provided the asset is 3[used by the person for the purposes of his
business for the first time or the tax year in which commercial production is
commenced, whichever is later].
(2) The amount of the initial allowance of a person shall be computed by
applying the rate specified in Part II of the Third Schedule against the cost of the
asset.
(3) The rules in section 76 shall apply in determining the cost of an eligible
depreciable asset for the purposes of this section.
Full stop substituted by Finance Act, 2017.
Added by the Finance Act, 2017.
Substituted for “wholly and exclusively used by the person in deriving income from business
chargeable to tax” by Finance Act,2004 dated June 24,2004 w.e.f July 1,2004
1[(4) A deduction allowed under this section to a leasing company or an
investment bank or a modaraba or a scheduled bank or a development finance
institution in respect of assets owned by the leasing company or the investment
bank or the modaraba or the scheduled bank or the development finance institution
and leased to another person shall be deducted only against the leased rental
income derived in respect of such assets.]
(5) In this section, “eligible depreciable asset” means a depreciable asset
2[ ] other than —
(a) any road transport vehicle unless the vehicle is plying for hire;
(b) any furniture, including fittings;
(c) any plant or machinery3[that has been used previously in
Pakistan]; 4[ ]
(d) any plant or machinery in relation to which a deduction has been
allowed under another section of this Ordinance for the entire
cost of the asset in the tax year in which the asset is acquired
5[; or
(e) immovable property or structural improvement to the immovable
property.]
6[ ]
7[ ]
Sub-section (4) substituted by the Finance Act, 2002. The substituted sub-section (4) read as follows:
“(4) A deduction allowed under this section to a leasing company in respect of assets owned
by the company and leased to another person shall be deductible only against the lease rental
income derived in respect of such assets.”
The words and comma “that is plant and machinery,” omitted by the Finance Act, 2003.
The words “that is acquired second hand” substituted by the Finance Act.2003
The word “or” omitted by the Finance Act, 2022.
The full stop substituted with semi colon and the word “or” and thereafter clause (e) added by the
Finance Act, 2022.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2008.
Section 23A omitted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier this omission was made through Tax Laws
(Second Amendment) Ordinance, 2021. The omitted section read as follows:
“23A. First Year Allowance.— (1) Plant, machinery and equipment installed by any industrial
undertaking set up in specified rural and under developed areas 7[or engaged in the manufacturing of
cellular mobile phones and qualifying for exemption under clause (126N) of Part I of the Second
Schedule] and owned and managed by a company shall be allowed first year allowance in lieu of initial
allowance under section 23 at the rate specified in Part II of the Third Schedule against the cost of the
“eligible depreciable assets” put to use after July 1, 2008.
(2) The provisions of section 23 except sub-sections (1) and (2) thereof, shall mutatis mutandis
apply.
(3) The Federal Government may notify “specified areas” for the purposes of sub-section (1).]
1[23B. Accelerated depreciation to alternate energy projects.— (1) Any plant,
machinery and equipments installed for generation of alternate energy by an
industrial undertaking set up anywhere in Pakistan and owned and managed by a
company shall be allowed first year allowance in lieu of initial allowance under
section 23, at the rate specified in Part II of the Third Schedule against the cost of
the eligible depreciation assets put to use after first day of July, 2009.
(2) The provisions of section 23 except sub-sections (1) and (2) thereof,
shall mutatis mutandis apply.]
24. Intangibles.—(1) A person shall be allowed an amortisation deduction in
accordance with this section in a tax year for the cost of the person’s intangibles–
(a) that are wholly or partly used by the person in the tax year in
deriving income from business chargeable to tax; and
(b) that have a normal useful life exceeding one year.
(2) No deduction shall be allowed under this section where a deduction
has been allowed under another section of this Ordinance for the entire cost of the
intangible in the tax year in which the intangible is acquired.
(3) Subject to sub-section (7), the amortization deduction of a person for
a tax year shall be computed according to the following formula, namely:—
A
B
where —
A is the cost of the intangible; and
B is the normal useful life of the intangible in whole years.
2[(4) An intangible that does not have an ascertainable useful life shall be
treated as if it had a normal useful life of 3[fifteen years].]
(5) Where an intangible is used in a tax year partly in deriving income
from business chargeable to tax and partly for another use, the deduction allowed
under this section for that year shall be restricted to the fair proportional part of the
amount that would be allowed if the intangible were wholly used to derive income
from business chargeable to tax.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2009.
In sub-section 4 of section 24 is substituted by the Finance Act, 2019, the substituted sub-section
read as follow:
(4) An intangible —
(a) with a normal useful life of more than ten years; or
(b) that does not have an ascertainable useful life,
shall be treated as if it had a normal useful life of ten years.
The expression “twenty-five years” substituted by the Finance Act, 2025.
(6) Where an intangible is not used for the whole of the tax year in deriving
income from business chargeable to tax, the deduction allowed under this section
shall be computed according to the following formula, namely: —
A x B/C
where —
A is the amount of 1[amortization] computed under sub-section (3) or (5), as
the case may be;
B is the number of days in the tax year the intangible is used in deriving income
from business chargeable to tax; and
C is the number of days in the tax year.
(7) The total deductions allowed to a person under this section in the
current tax year and all previous tax years in respect of an intangible shall not
exceed the cost of the intangible.
(8) Where, in any tax year, a person disposes of an intangible, no
amortisation deduction shall be allowed under this section for that year and —
(a) if the consideration received by the person exceeds the written
down value of the intangible at the time of disposal, the excess
shall be income of the person chargeable to tax in that year
under the head “Income from Business”; or
(b) if the consideration received is less than the written down value
of the intangible at the time of disposal, the difference shall be
allowed as a deduction in computing the person’s income
chargeable under the head “Income from Business” in that year.
(9) For the purposes of sub-section (8) —
(a) the written down value of an intangible at the time of disposal
shall be the cost of the intangible reduced by the total
deductions allowed to the person under this section in respect
of the intangible or, where the intangible is not wholly used to
derive income chargeable to tax, the amount that would be
allowed under this section if the intangible were wholly so used;
and
The word “depreciation” substituted by the Finance Act, 2002
(b) the consideration received on disposal of an intangible shall be
determined in accordance with section 77.
(10) For the purposes of this section, an intangible that is available for use
on a day (including a non-working day) is treated as used on that day.
(11) In this section, —
“cost” in relation to an intangible, means any expenditure incurred in
acquiring or creating the intangible, including any expenditure incurred
in improving or renewing the intangible; and
“intangible” means any patent, invention, design or model, secret
formula or process, copyright 1[, trade mark, scientific or technical
knowledge, computer software, motion picture film, export quotas,
franchise, licence, intellectual property], or other like property or right,
contractual rights and any expenditure that provides an advantage or
benefit for a period of more than one year (other than expenditure
incurred to acquire a depreciable asset or unimproved land, 2[but shall
not include self-generated goodwill or any adjustment arising on
account of accounting treatment in the manner as may be prescribed]
25. Pre-commencement expenditure.—(1) A person shall be allowed a
deduction for any pre-commencement expenditure in accordance with this section.
(2) Pre-commencement expenditure shall be amortized on a straight-line
basis at the rate specified in Part III of the Third Schedule.
(3) The total deductions allowed under this section in the current tax year
and all previous tax years in respect of an amount of pre-commencement
expenditure shall not exceed the amount of the expenditure.
(4) No deduction shall be allowed under this section where a deduction
has been allowed under another section of this Ordinance for the entire amount of
the pre-commencement expenditure in the tax year in which it is incurred.
(5) In this section, “pre-commencement expenditure” means any
expenditure incurred before the commencement of a business wholly and
exclusively to derive income chargeable to tax, including the cost of feasibility
studies, construction of prototypes, and trial production activities, but shall not
include any expenditure which is incurred in acquiring land, or which is depreciated
or amortised under section 22 or 24.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
2The words Inserted by the Finance Act, 2019.
26. Scientific research expenditure.— (1) A person shall be allowed a
deduction for scientific research expenditure incurred in Pakistan in a tax year
wholly and exclusively for the purpose of deriving income from business
chargeable to tax.
(2) In this section —
“scientific research” means any 1[activity] 2[undertaken in Pakistan] in
the fields of natural or applied science for the development of human
knowledge;
“scientific research expenditure” means any expenditure incurred by
a person on scientific research 3[undertaken in Pakistan] for the
purposes of developing the person’s business, including any
contribution to a scientific research institution to undertake scientific
research for the purposes of the person’s business, other than
expenditure incurred –
(a) in the acquisition of any depreciable asset or intangible;
(b) in the acquisition of immovable property; or
(c) for the purpose of ascertaining the existence, location, extent or
quality of a natural deposit; and
“scientific research institution” means any institution certified by the
4[Board] as conducting scientific research in Pakistan.
27. Employee training and facilities.— A person shall be allowed a deduction
for any expenditure (other than capital expenditure) incurred in a tax year in
respect of—
(a) any educational institution or hospital in Pakistan established for
the benefit of the person’s employees and their dependents;
(b) any institute in Pakistan established for the training of industrial
workers recognized, aided, or run by the Federal Government
5[or a Provincial Government] or a 6[Local Government]; or
The word “activities” substituted by the Finance Act, 2002
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
The words “local authority” substituted by the Finance Act, 2008.
(c) the training of any person, being a citizen of Pakistan, in
connection with a scheme approved by the 1[Board] for the
purposes of this section.
28. Profit on debt, financial costs and lease payments.— (1) Subject to this
Ordinance, a deduction shall be allowed for a tax year for —
(a) any profit on debt incurred by a person in the tax year to the
extent that the proceeds or benefit of the debt have been used
by the person 2[for the purposes of business];
(b) any lease rental incurred by a person in the tax year to a
scheduled bank, financial institution, an approved modaraba, an
approved leasing company or a Special Purpose Vehicle on
behalf of the Originator for an asset used by the person 3[for the
purposes of business] 4[:]
5[Provided that for the purpose of determining the
deduction on account of lease rentals the cost of a passenger
transport vehicle not paying for hire to the extent of principal
amount shall not exceed two and a half million rupees;]
(c) any amount incurred by a person in the tax year to a modaraba
or a participation term certificate holder for any funds borrowed
and used by the person 6[for the purposes of business];
(d) any amount incurred by a scheduled bank in the tax year to a
person maintaining a profit or loss sharing account or a deposit
with the bank as a distribution of profits by the bank in respect
of the account or deposit;
(e) any amount incurred by the House Building Finance
Corporation (hereinafter referred to as “the Corporation”)
constituted under the House Building Finance Corporation Act,
1952 (XVIII of 1952), in the tax year to the State Bank of
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
The words “in deriving income chargeable to tax under the head “Income from Business”
substituted by the Finance Act, 2004.
The words “in deriving income chargeable to tax under the head “Income from Business”
substituted by the Finance Act, 2004.
Sami colon substituted by colon and thereafter the new proviso added through Finance Act, 2020
dated 30th June, 2020
5 Proviso added through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
The words “in deriving income chargeable to tax under the head “Income from Business”
substituted by the Finance Act, 2004.
Pakistan (hereinafter referred to as “the Bank”) as the share of
the Bank in the profits derived by the Corporation on its
investment in property made under a scheme of partnership in
profit and loss, where the investment is provided by the Bank
under the House Building Finance Corporation (Issue and
Redemption of Certificates) Regulations, 1982;
(f) any amount incurred by the National Development Leasing
Corporation Limited (hereinafter referred to as “the
Corporation”) in the tax year to the State Bank of Pakistan
(hereinafter referred to as “the Bank”) as the share of the Bank
in the profits derived by the Corporation on its leasing operations
financed out of a credit line provided by the Bank on a profit and
loss sharing basis;
(g) any amount incurred by the 1[Small and Medium Enterprises
Bank (hereinafter referred to as “the SME Bank”)]in the tax year to
the State Bank of Pakistan (hereinafter referred to as the “Bank”)
as the share of the Bank in the profits derived by the 2[SME Bank]
on investments made in small business out of a credit line provided
by the Bank on a profit and loss sharing basis;
(h) any amount incurred by a person in the tax year to a banking
company under a scheme of musharika representing the bank’s
share in the profits of the musharika;
(i) any amount incurred by a person in the tax year to a certificate
holder under a musharika scheme approved by the Securities
and Exchange Commission and Religious Board formed under
the Modaraba Companies and Modaraba (Floatation and
Control) Ordinance, 1980 (XXXI of 1980) representing the
certificate holder’s share in the profits of the musharika; or
(j) the financial cost of the securitization of receivables incurred by
an Originator in the tax year from a Special Purpose Vehicle
being the difference between the amount received by the
Originator and the amount of receivables securitized from a
Special Purpose Vehicle.
(2) Notwithstanding any other provision in this Ordinance, where any assets
are transferred by an Originator, as a consequence of securitisation3[“or issuance of
The words “Small Business Finance Corporation (hereinafter referred to as “the Corporation”)”
substituted by the Finance Act, 2009.
The word “Corporation” substituted by the Finance Act, 2011.
Inserted by the Presidential Order No.F.2(1)/2016-Pub dated 31.08.2016.
sukuks”], to a Special Purpose Vehicle, it shall be treated as a financing transaction
irrespective of the method of accounting adopted by the Originator.
(3) In this section, —
“approved leasing company” means a leasing company approved by
the 1[Board] for the purposes of clause (b) of sub-section (1); and
“approved modaraba” means a modaraba approved by the 2[Board]
for the purposes of clause (b) of sub-section (1).
29. Bad debts.— (1) A person shall be allowed a deduction for a bad debt in
a tax year if the following conditions are satisfied, namely:—
(a) the amount of the debt was –
(i) previously included in the person’s income from business
chargeable to tax; or
(ii) in respect of money lent by a financial institution in
deriving income from business chargeable to tax;
(b) the debt or part of the debt is written off in the accounts of the
person in the tax year; and
(c) there are reasonable grounds for believing that the debt is
irrecoverable.
(2) The amount of the deduction allowed to a person under this section
for a tax year shall not exceed the amount of the debt written off in the accounts
of the person in the tax year.
(3) Where a person has been allowed a deduction in a tax year for a bad
debt and in a subsequent tax year the person receives in cash or kind any amount
in respect of that debt, the following rules shall apply, namely:–
(a) where the amount received exceeds the difference between the
whole of such bad debt and the amount previously allowed as a
deduction under this section, the excess shall be included in the
person’s income under the head “Income from Business” for the
tax year in which it was received; or
(b) where the amount received is less than the difference between
the whole of such bad debt and the amount allowed as a
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
deduction under this section, the shortfall shall be allowed as a
bad debt deduction in computing the person’s income under the
head “Income from Business” for the tax year in which it was
received.
1[29A. Provision regarding consumer loans.— (1) A 2[ ] 3[non-banking
finance company or the House Building Finance Corporation] shall be allowed a
deduction, not exceeding three per cent of the income for the tax year, arising out
of consumer loans for creation of a reserve to off-set bad debts arising out of such
loans.
(2) Where bad debt cannot be wholly set off against reserve, any amount
of bad debt, exceeding the reserves shall be carried forward for adjustment against
the reserve for the following years.]
4[Explanation.— In this section, “consumer loan” means a loan of
money or its equivalent made by 5[ ] a non-banking finance company
or the House Building Finance Corporation to a debtor (consumer)
and the loan is entered primarily for personal, family or household
purposes and includes debts created by the use of a lender credit card
or similar arrangement as well as insurance premium financing.]
30. Profit on non-performing debts of a banking company or development
finance institution.—(1) A banking company or development finance institution
6[or Non-Banking Finance Company (NBFC) or modaraba] shall be allowed a deduction
for any profit accruing on a non-performing debt of the banking company or institution
7[or Non-Banking Finance Company (NBFC) or modaraba] where the profit is credited
to a suspense account in accordance with the Prudential Regulations for Banks or 8[Non-
Banking Finance Company or modaraba] Non-bank Financial Institutions, as the case
may be, issued by the State Bank of Pakistan 9[or the Securities and Exchange
Commission of Pakistan].
(2) Any profit deducted under sub-section (1) that is subsequently
recovered by the banking company or development finance institution 10[or Non-
Banking Finance Company (NBFC) or modaraba] shall be included in the income
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
The words “banking company or” omitted by the Finance Act, 2009.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2004.
Added by the Finance Act, 2004.
The words “a banking company or” omitted by the Finance Act, 2009.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
The words “Non-bank Financial Institutions” substituted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
of the company or institution 1[or Non-Banking Finance Company (NBFC) or
modaraba] chargeable under the head “Income from Business” for the tax year in
which it is recovered.
31. Transfer to participatory reserve.—(1) Subject to this section, a
company shall be allowed a deduction for a tax year for any amount transferred by
the company in the year to a participatory reserve created under 2[section 66 of
the Companies Act, 2017 (XIX of 2017)] in accordance with an agreement relating
to participatory redeemable capital entered into between the company and a
banking company as defined in the3[Financial Institutions(Recovery of Finances)
Ordinance,2001 (XLVI of 2001).]
(2) The deduction allowed under subsection (1) for a tax year shall be limited
to five per cent of the value of the company’s participatory redeemable capital.
(3) No deduction shall be allowed under subsection (1) if the amount of
the tax exempted accumulation in the participatory reserve exceeds ten per cent
of the amount of the participatory redeemable capital.
(4) Where any amount accumulated in the participatory reserve of a company
has been allowed as a deduction under this section is applied by the company towards
any purpose other than payment of share of profit on the participatory redeemable capital
or towards any purpose not allowable for deduction or exemption under this Ordinance
the amount so applied shall be included in the income from business of the company in
the tax year in which it is so applied.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
The expression “section 120 of the Companies Ordinance, 1984 (XLVII of 1984)” substituted by the
Finance Act, 2021.
The words “Banking Tribunals Ordinance, 1984” substituted by the words “Financial Institutions
(Recovery Of Finances) Ordinance, 2001 (XLVI of 2001) by the Finance Act 2014”.
