CHAPTER VIII
ANTI-AVOIDANCE
108. Transactions between associates. — (1) The Commissioner may, in
respect of any transaction between persons who are associates, distribute,
apportion or allocate income, deductions or tax credits between the persons as is
necessary to reflect the income that the persons would have realised in an arm’s
length transaction.
(2) In making any adjustment under sub-section (1), the Commissioner
may determine the source of income and the nature of any payment or loss as
revenue, capital or otherwise.
1[(3) Every taxpayer who has entered into a transaction with its associate
shall:
(a) maintain a master file and a local file containing documents and
information as may be prescribed;
(b) keep 2[, maintain and furnish to the Board] prescribed country-by-
country report, where applicable;
(c) keep and maintain any other information and document in respect of
transaction with its associate as may be prescribed; and
(d) keep the files, documents, information and reports specified in clauses
(a) to (c) for the period as may be prescribed.
(4) A taxpayer who has entered into a transaction with its associate shall
furnish, within thirty days the documents and information to be kept and maintained
under 3[clause (a), (c) or (d) of] sub-section (3) if required by the Commissioner in
the course of any proceedings under this Ordinance.;
(5) The Commissioner may, by an order in writing, grant the taxpayer an
extension of time for furnishing the documents and information under sub-section
(4), if the taxpayer applies in writing to the Commissioner for an extension of time
to furnish the said documents or information:
Provided that the Commissioner shall not grant an extension of more than
forty-five days, when such information or documents were required to be furnished
under sub-section (4), unless there are exceptional circumstances justifying a
longer extension of time.]
Added by the Finance Act, 2016.
The words “and maintain” substituted by the Finance Act, 2018
Insertedby the Finance Act, 2018
1[(6) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section (1), for the tax year 2024
and onwards, where any amount is claimed as deduction for the tax year or for any
of the two preceding tax years on account of royalty paid or payable to an associate
directly or indirectly in respect of use of any brand name, logo, patent, invention,
design or model, secret formula or process, copyright, trademark, scientific or
technical knowledge, franchise, license, intellectual property or other like property
or right or contractual right and on a notice issued by the Commissioner, the
taxpayer fails to furnish any explanation or evidence that no benefit has been
conferred on the associate, twenty five percent of the total expenditure for the tax
year in respect of sales promotion, advertisement and publicity shall be disallowed
and allocated to the said associate.]
2[108A. Report from independent chartered accountant or cost and
management accountant. – (1) Where the Commissioner is of the opinion that a
transaction has not been declared at arm’s length, the Commissioner may obtain
report from an independent chartered accountant or cost and management
accountant to determine the fair market value of asset, product, expenditure or
service at the time of transaction.
(2) The scope, terms and conditions of the report shall be as may be
prescribed.
(3) Where the Commissioner is satisfied with the report of the
independent chartered accountant or cost and management accountant, the fair
market value of asset, product, expenditure or service determined in the report
shall be treated as definite information for the purpose of sub-section (8) of section
122.
(4) Where the Commissioner is not stratified with the report of the
independent chartered accountant or cost and management accountant, the
Commissioner may record reasons for being not satisfied with the report and seek
report from another independent chartered accountant or cost and management
accountant, to determine the fair market value of asset, product, expenditure or
service at the time of transaction.
(5) The Commissioner shall seek report under sub-section (1) or sub-
section (3), as the case may be, with prior approval of the Board.
108B. Transactions under dealership arrangements.- (1) Where a person
supplies products listed in the Third Schedule to the Sales Tax Act, 1990 or any
other products as prescribed by the Board, under a dealership arrangement with
the dealers who are not registered under Sales Tax Act, 1990 and are not
appearing in the active taxpayers’ list under this Ordinance, an amount equal to
Sub-section (6) added by the Finance Act, 2024.
New sections (108A) & (108B) inserted through Finance Act, 2019
seventy-five percent of the dealer’s margin shall be added to the income of the
person making such supplies.
(2) For the purposes of operation of this section, ten percent of the sale
price of the manufacturer shall be treated as dealers margin.]
109. Recharacterisation of income and deductions. — (1) For the purposes
of determining liability to tax under this Ordinance, the Commissioner may –
(a) recharacterise a transaction or an element of a transaction that was
entered into as part of a tax avoidance scheme;
(b) disregard a transaction that does not have substantial economic effect;
1[ ]
(c) recharacterise a transaction where the form of the transaction does not
reflect the substance2[;]
3[(d) from tax year 2018 and onwards, disregard an entity or a
corporate structure that does not have an economic or commercial
substance or was created as part of the tax avoidance scheme] 4[;
or
(e) from tax year 2018 and onwards, treat a place of business in Pakistan
as a permanent establishment, if the said place fulfills the conditions as
specified in sub-clause (g) of clause (41) of section 2.]
(2) In this section, “tax avoidance scheme” means any transaction where
one of the main purposes of a person in entering into the transaction is the
avoidance or reduction of any person’s liability to tax under this Ordinance.
5[(3) Reduction in a person's liability to tax as referred to in sub-section (2)
means a reduction, avoidance or deferral of tax or increase in a refund of tax and
includes a reduction, avoidance or deferral of tax that would have been payable
under this Ordinance, but are not payable due to a tax treaty for the avoidance of
double taxation as referred to in section 107.]
The word “or” omitted by the finance Act 2022.
Full stop substituted with a semicolon by the finance Act 2022.
Inserted by the finance Act 2018
Full stop substituted and a new clause (e) added by the Finance Act 2022.
Added by the finance Act 2018
1[109A. Controlled foreign company.— (1) There shall be included in the taxable
income of a resident person for a tax year an income attributable to controlled
foreign company as defined in sub- section (2).
(2) For the purpose of this section, controlled foreign company means a
non-resident company, if ─
(a) more than fifty percent of the capital or voting rights of the non-
resident company are held, directly or indirectly, by one or more
persons resident in Pakistan o more than forty percent of the capital
of the or voting rights of the non-resident company are held, directly
or indirectly, by a single resident person in Pakistan;
(b) tax paid, after taking into account any foreign tax credits available to
the non-resident company, on the income derived or accrued, during
a foreign tax year, by the non-resident company to any tax authority
outside Pakistan is less than sixty percent of the tax payable on the
said income under this Ordinance;
(c) the non-resident company does not derive active business income
as defined under sub-section (3); and
(d) the shares of the company are not traded on any stock exchange
recognized by law of the country or jurisdiction of which the non-
resident company is resident for tax purposes.
(3) A company shall be treated to have derived active income if─
(a) more than eighty percent of income of the company does not include
income from dividend, interest, property, capital gains, royalty,
annuity payment, supply of goods or services to an associate, sale
or licensing of intangibles and management, holding or investment
in securities and financial assets; and
(b) principally derives income under the head “income from business”
in the country or jurisdiction of which it is a resident.
(4) Income of a controlled foreign company is an amount equal to the taxable
income of that company determined in accordance with the provisions of this
Ordinance as if that controlled foreign company is a resident taxpayer and
shall be taxed at the rate specified in Division III of Part I of the First Schedule.
(5) The amount of attributable income under sub-section (1) for a tax year
shall be computed according to the following formula, namely:—
Inserted by the finance Act 2018
A x (B/100)
Where -
A is the amount of income of a controlled foreign company under sub-
section (2); and
B is the percentage of capital or voting rights, whichever is higher,
held by the person, directly or indirectly, in the controlled foreign
company.
(6) The amount of attributable income shall be treated as zero, if the
capital or voting rights of the resident person is less than ten percent.
(7) Income of a controlled foreign company shall be treated as zero, if it
is less than ten million Rupees.
(8) The income of a controlled foreign company in respect of a foreign tax
year, as defined in sub-section (9), shall be determined in the currency of that
controlled foreign company and shall, for purposes of determining the amount to
be included in the income of any resident person during any tax year under
the provisions of this section, be converted into Rupees at the State Bank of
Pakistan rate applying between that foreign currency and the Rupee on the last
day of the tax year.
(9) Foreign tax year, in relation to a non-resident company, means any
year or period of reporting for income tax purposes by that non-resident company
in the country or jurisdiction of residence or, if that company is not subject to
income tax, any annual period of financial reporting by that company.
(10) The income attributable to controlled foreign company under sub-
section (1) and taxed in Pakistan under this section shall not be taxed again when
the same income is received in Pakistan by the resident taxpayer.
(11) Where tax has been paid by the resident person on the income
attributable to controlled foreign company and in a subsequent tax year the
resident person receives dividend distributed by the controlled foreign company,
after deduction of tax on dividend, the resident person shall be allowed a tax credit
equal to the lesser of, —
(i) foreign tax paid, as defined in sub-section (8) of section 103, on
dividends; and
(ii) Pakistan tax payable, as defined in section 103, for the tax year
in which the dividend is received by the resident taxpayer.]
110. Salary paid by private companies. — Where, in any tax year, salary is
paid by a private company to an employee of the company for services rendered
by the employee in an earlier tax year and the salary has not been included in the
employee’s salary chargeable to tax in that earlier year, the Commissioner may, if
there are reasonable grounds to believe that payment of the salary was deferred,
include the amount in the employee’s income under the head “Salary” in that earlier
year.
111. Unexplained income or assets. — (1) Where —
(a) any amount is credited in a person’s books of account;
(b) a person has made any investment or is the owner of any money
or valuable article; 1[ ]
(c) a person has incurred any expenditure2[; or]
3[(d) any person has concealed income or furnished inaccurate
particulars of income including —
(i) the suppression of any production, sales or any amount
chargeable to tax; or
(ii) the suppression of any item of receipt liable to tax in
whole or in part,]
and the person offers no explanation about the nature and source of the amount
credited or the investment, money, valuable article, or funds from which the
expenditure was made 4[suppression of any production, sales, any amount
chargeable to tax and of any item of receipt liable to tax] or the explanation offered
by the person is not, 5[in the Commissioner’s opinion, satisfactory-
(a) the amount credited, value of the investment, money, value of the
article, or amount of expenditure shall be included in the person’s
income chargeable to tax under the head “Income from Other
Sources” to the extent it is not adequately explained; and
The word “or” omitted by the Finance Act, 2011.
Comma substituted by the Finance Act, 2011.
Added by the Finance Act, 2011
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2011.
5 The expressions “in the Commissioner’s opinion, satisfactory, the amount credited, value of the
investment, money, value of the article, or amount of expenditure 5[suppressed amount of production,
sales or any amount chargeable to tax or of any item of receipt liable to tax] shall be included in the
person’s income chargeable to tax under head “Income from 5[Other Sources”] to the extent it is not
adequately explained” substituted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
(b) the suppressed amount of production, sales or any amount
chargeable to tax or of any item of receipt liable to tax shall be included
in the person’s income chargeable to tax under the head “Income from
Business” to the extent it is not adequately explained”] 1[:]
2[Provided that where a taxpayer explains the nature and
source of the amount credited or the investment made, money or
valuable article owned or funds from which the expenditure was made,
by way of agricultural income, such explanation shall be accepted to
the extent of agricultural income worked back on the basis of
agricultural income tax paid under the relevant provincial law.]
3[(2) The amount referred to in sub-section (1) shall be included in the
person’s income chargeable to tax:
(i) in the tax year to which such amount relates if the amount
representing investment, money, valuable article or expenditure
is situated or incurred in Pakistan or concealed income is
Pakistan-source; and
(ii) in the tax year immediately preceding the tax year in which the
investment, money, valuable article or expenditure is discovered
by the Commissioner and is situated or incurred outside Pakistan
4[or] concealed income is foreign-source.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubt, it is clarified that where
the investment, money, valuable article or expenditure is acquired
or incurred outside Pakistan in a prior tax year and is liable to be
included in the income of tax year 2018 and onwards on the basis
of discovery made by the Commissioner during tax year 2019 and
onwards and the person explains the acquisition of such asset
or expenditure from sources relating to tax year in which such
asset was acquired or expenditure was incurred, such explanation
shall not be rejected on the basis that the source does not relate
to the tax year in which the amount chargeable to tax is to be
included.]
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2013.
Added by the Finance Act, 2013.
Sub-section (2) substituted by the Finance Act, 2018. The substituted sub-section (2) read as follows:
“(2) The amount referred to in sub-section (1) shall be included in the person’s income chargeable to tax in the
tax year 3[to which such amount relates.”
The word “and” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
1[(2A) For the purposes of clause (ii) of sub-section (2) of this section, the
“year of discovery of foreign assets or expenditure or concealed income”, shall
mean the year in which the Commissioner has issued a notice requiring the person
to explain the nature and source of such foreign assets, expenditure or concealed
income.]
2[(3) Where the declared cost of any investment or valuable article or the
declared amount of expenditure of a person is less than reasonable cost of the
investment or the valuable article, or the reasonable amount of the expenditure,
the Commissioner may, having regard to all the circumstances, include the
difference in the person’s income chargeable to tax under the head “Income from
Other Sources” in the tax year 3[to which the investment, valuable article or the
expenditure relates].]
4[ ]
5[(4) Sub-section (1) does not apply to any amount of foreign exchange
remitted from outside Pakistan through normal banking channels not exceeding
five million Rupees in a tax year that is en-cashed into rupees by a scheduled bank
and a certificate from such bank is produced to that effect.]
6[Explanation.— For removal of doubt, it is clarified that the remittance through
money service bureaus, exchange companies or money transfer operators shall
be deemed to constitute foreign exchange remitted from outside Pakistan through
normal banking channels as provided under this sub-section.
Sub-section (2A) inserted by the Finance Act, 2024.
Sub-section (3) substituted by the Finance Act, 2003. The substituted sub-section (3) read as
follows:
“(3) Where the declared value of any investment, valuable article or expenditure of a person
is less than the cost of the investment or valuable article, or the amount of the expenditure, the
Commissioner may, having regard to all the circumstances, include the difference in the person’s
income chargeable to tax under the head “Income from Other Sources” in the tax year in which the
difference is discovered.”
The words “immediately preceding the financial year in which the difference is discovered” substituted
by the Finance Act, 2010.
Sub-section (4) substituted by the Finance Act, 2004. The substituted sub-section (4) read as follows:
“(4) Sub-section (1) does not apply to any amount of foreign exchange remitted from outside
Pakistan through normal banking channels that is encashed into rupees by a scheduled bank and a
certificate from such bank is produced to that effect.”
Sub-section (4) substituted by the Finance Act, 2021. The substituted sub-section read as follows:
(4) Sub-section (1) does not apply,—
(a) to any amount of foreign exchange remitted from outside Pakistan through normal
banking channels 5[not exceeding 5[five] million Rupees in a tax year] that is
encashed into rupees by a scheduled bank and a certificate from such bank is
produced to that effect5[.]
5[ ]
5[ ]
The explanation and sub-section (4A) inserted by the Finance Act, 2022.
(4A) Where a taxpayer, while explaining the nature and source of any
amount referred to in sub-section (1), takes into account any source of income
which is subject to final tax under any provision of the Ordinance, the taxpayer
shall not be entitled to take credit of any sum as is in excess of imputable income,
unless the excess amount is reasonably attributed to the business activities subject
to final tax and the taxpayer furnishes financial statements and accounts duly
audited by a chartered accountant.]
(5) The 1[Board] may make rules under section 2[237] for the purposes of
this section.
3[ ]
4[Explanation.— For the removal of doubt, it is clarified that a separate notice
under this section is not required to be issued if the explanation regarding
nature and sources of;
(i) any amount credited in a person’s books of account; or
(ii) any investment made or ownership of money or valuable article; or
(iii) funds from which expenditure was made; or
(iv) suppression of any production, sales, or any amount chargeable to
tax; or
(v) suppression of any item of receipt liable to tax in whole or in part has
been confronted to the taxpayer through a notice under sub-section
(9) of section 122 of the Ordinance.]
112. Liability in respect of certain security transactions.— (1) Where the
owner of any security disposes of the security and thereafter re-acquires the
security and the result of the transaction is that any income payable in respect of
the security is receivable by any person other than the owner, the income shall be
treated, for all purposes of the Ordinance, as the income of the owner and not of
the other person.
(2) In this section, “security” includes 5[bonds, certificates, debentures,]
stocks and shares.
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
The figure “232” substituted by the Finance Act, 2002.
3 Added by the Finance Act, 2021.
The explanation substituted by the Finance Act, 2022. The substituted Explanation read as follows:
“Explanation.—For the removal of doubt, a separate notice under this section is not required to be
issued if the explanation regarding nature and sources of amount credited or the investment of money,
valuable article, or the funds from which expenditure was made has been confronted to the taxpayer
through a notice under sub-section (9) of section 122 of this Ordinance.”
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
