PART V
COMMON PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO
ASSOCIATIONS OF PERSONS AND COMPANIES
98. Change in control of an entity.- (1) Where there is a change of fifty per
cent or more in the underlying ownership of an entity, any loss incurred for a tax
year before the change shall not be allowed as a deduction in a tax year after the
change, unless the entity —
(a) continues to conduct the same business after the change as it
conducted before the change until the loss has been fully set
off; and
(b) does not, until the loss has been fully set off, engage in any new
business or investment after the change where the principal
purpose of the entity or the beneficial owners of the entity is to
utilise the loss so as to reduce the income tax payable on the
income arising from the new business or investment.
(2) In this section, —
“entity” means a company or association of persons to which sub-
section (1) of section 92 applies;
“ownership interest” means a share in a company or the interest of a
member in an association of persons; and
“underlying ownership” in relation to an entity, means an ownership
interest in the entity held, directly or indirectly through an interposed
entity or entities, by an individual or by a person not ultimately owned
by individuals.
[PART VA
TAX LIABILITY IN CERTAIN CASES
98A. Change in the constitution of an association of persons.—Where,
during the course of a tax year, a change occurs in the constitution of an
association of persons, liability of filing the return on behalf of the association of
persons for the tax year shall be on the association of persons as constituted at
the time of filing of such return but the income of the association of persons shall
be apportioned among the members who were entitled to receive it and, where the
tax assessed on a member cannot be recovered from him it shall be recovered
from the association of persons as constituted at the time of filing the return.
98B. Discontinuance of business or dissolution of an association of
persons.— (1) Subject to the provisions of section 117, where any business or
profession carried on by an association of persons has been discontinued, or
where an association of persons is dissolved, all the provisions of this Ordinance,
shall, so far as may be, apply as if no such discontinuance or dissolution had taken
place.
(2) Every person, who was, at the time of such discontinuance or
dissolution, a member of such association of persons and the legal representative
of any such person who is deceased, shall be jointly and severally liable for the
amount of tax payable by the association of persons.
98C. Succession to business, otherwise than on death.— (1) Where a person
carrying on any business or profession has been succeeded in any tax year by any
other person (hereafter in this section referred to as the “predecessor” and
“successor” respectively), otherwise than on the death of the predecessor, and the
successor continues to carry on that business or profession,-
(a) the predecessor shall be liable to pay tax in respect of the income of
the tax year in which the succession took place upto the date of
succession and of the tax year or years preceding that year; and
(b) the successor shall be liable to pay tax in respect of the income of
such tax year after the date of succession.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where the
predecessor cannot be found, the tax liability in respect of the tax year in which the
succession took place upto the date of succession and of the tax year or years
preceding that year shall be that of the successor in like manner and to the same
extent as it would have been that of the predecessor, and all the provisions of this
Ordinance shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
(3) Where any tax payable under this section in respect of such business
or profession cannot be recovered from the predecessor, it shall be recoverable
from the successor, who shall be entitled to recover it from the predecessor.]
