PART I
INSURANCE BUSINESS
99. Special provisions relating to insurance business. — The profits and
gains of any insurance business shall be computed in accordance with the rules in
the Fourth Schedule.
1[ ]
2[ ]
3[99A. Special provisions relating to payment of tax through electricity
connections. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Ordinance, a tax shall
Inserted by the National Assembly Secretariat’s O.M. No.F.22(2)/2016-Legis dated 29.01.2016.
Section 99A substituted by the Finance Act, 2022. The substituted section read as follows:
“99A. Special provisions relating to traders.-(1) Subject to sub-section (3), tax payable on the profits
and gains of a trader as defined in sub-section (4) who upto thirty first day of December, 2015 has not
filed a return for any of the preceding ten tax years shall be computed in accordance with the rules laid
down in Part I of the Ninth Schedule.
(2) Subject to sub-section (3), tax payable on the profits and gains of any trader as defined
in sub-section (4), who-
(a) is a filer; or
(b) is NTN holder and a non-filer but has filed return or returns in any of the last ten
preceding tax years, shall be computed in accordance with the rules laid down in
Part II of the Ninth Schedule.
(3) Sub-sections (1) and (2) shall apply, if-
(a) the return filed by the trader qualifies for acceptance in accordance with the rules
laid down in the Ninth Schedule;
(b) return relates to tax years 2015 to 2018; and
(c) income from business consists of profits and gains from trading activity only.
(4) For the purpose of this section and the Ninth Schedule, ‘trader’ means an individual or
an association of persons (AOP) buying goods or merchandise and selling the same without further
processing and providing, business-related after sales, services by doing repair jobs.
Explanation 1.- For the removal of doubt it is clarified that any person engaged in-
(a) rendering of, or providing, services as defined in clause (ii) of sub-section (7) of section 153; or
(b) business of retailer falling under rule (5) of Chapter II of the Sales Tax Special Procedures Rules,
2007, shall not be treated as a trader for the purposes of this section.
Explanation 2.- It is also clarified that this section shall not apply to a person who is a Member of
the Senate of Pakistan, the National Assembly of Pakistan or a Provincial Assembly.”]
3 Section 99A substituted and shall be deemed to have been so substituted from 1st day of July, 2022
by the Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 2023 (XVI of 2023) dated 20.04.2023. Earlier this section was
substituted through Tax Laws (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 2022 (VI of 2022) dated 22.08.2022.
The substituted section read as follows:
“99A. Special provisions relating to payment of tax through electricity connections.– (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Ordinance, a tax shall be charged and collected from
retailers other than Tier-I retailers as defined in Sales Tax Act, 1990 (VII of 1990) and specified service
be charged and collected from retailers other than Tier-I retailers as defined in the
Sales Tax Act, 1990 (VII of 1990) and specified service providers on commercial
electricity connections at the rates specified in the income tax general order issued
in terms of sub-section (2).
(2) For the purposes of this section, the Federal Government or the Board
with the approval of the Minister in-charge pursuant to the approval of the
Economic Coordination Committee of the Cabinet may, issue an income tax
general order to —
(a) provide the scope, time, payment, recovery, penalty, default
surcharge, adjustment or refund of tax payable under this section in
such manner and with such conditions as may be specified;
(b) provide the collection of tax on the amount of bill or on any basis of
consumption, in addition to or in lieu of advance tax collectible under
sub-section (1) of section 235, at such rates or amounts, from such
date and with such conditions as may be specified;
(c) provide record keeping, filing of return, statement and assessment in
such manner and with such conditions as may be specified;
(d) provide mechanism of collection, deduction and payment of tax in
respect of any person;
(e) include or exempt any person or classes of persons, any income or
classes of income from the application of this section, in such manner
and with such conditions as may be specified; and
(f) provide that tax collected under this section shall in respect of such
persons or classes of persons be adjustable, final or minimum, in
providers on commercial electricity connections at the rates provided in clause (2A) of Division IV, Part
IV of the First Schedule.
(2) A retailer who has paid sales tax under sub-section (9) of section 3 of Sales Tax Act,
1990 (VII of 1990), shall not be required to pay tax under this section and the sales tax so paid shall
constitute discharge of tax liability under this section.
(3) The tax collected or paid under this section shall be final tax on the income of persons
covered under this section in respect of business being carried out from the premises where the
electricity connection is installed.
(4) For the purposes of this section, Board with the approval of the Minister in-charge may
issue an income tax general order to-
(a) provide the scope, time, payment, recovery, penalty, default surcharge, adjustment or
refund of tax payable under this section in such manner and with such conditions as
may be specified.
(b) provide record keeping, filing of return, statement and assessment in such manner and
with such conditions as may be specified;
(c) provide mechanism of collection, deduction and payment of tax in respect of any person;
or
(d) include or exempt any person or classes of persons, any income or classes of income
from the application of this section, in such manner and with such conditions as may be
specified.]
respect of any income to such extent and with such conditions as
may be specified.
(3) The provisions of sub-section (1) of section 235 shall apply to the
persons as specified therein unless specifically exempted under the income tax
general order issued under sub-section (2).
(4) The provisions of section 100BA and rule 1 of the Tenth Schedule
shall not apply to the tax collectible under this section unless specifically provided
in respect of the person or class of persons mentioned in the income tax general
order issued under sub-section (2).]
1[99B. Special procedure for small traders and shopkeepers:-Notwithstanding
anything contained in this Ordinance the 2[Board with the approval of the Minister-
in-charge] may, by notification in the official Gazette, prescribe special procedure
for scope and payment of tax, filing of return and assessment in respect of such
small traders and shopkeepers, in such cities or territories, as may be specified
therein.]
3[99C. Special procedure for certain persons.- Notwithstanding anything
contained in this Ordinance, the 4[Board with the approval of the Minister-in-
charge] may, by notification in the official Gazette, prescribe special procedure for
scope and payment of tax, record keeping, filing of return and assessment in
respect of small businesses, construction businesses, medical practitioners,
hospitals, educational institutions and any other sector specified by 5[Board with
the approval of the Minister-in-charge], in such cities or territories, as may be
specified therein.]
6[99D. Additional tax on certain income, profits and gains.– (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Ordinance or any other law for the time
being in force, for any of the last three tax years preceding the tax year 2023 and
onwards, in addition to any tax charged or chargeable, paid or payable under any
of the provisions of this Ordinance, an additional tax shall be imposed on every
person being a company who has any income, profit or gains that have arisen due
to any economic factor or factors that resulted in windfall income, profits or gains.
(2) The Federal Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, –
(a) specify sector or sectors, for which this section applies;
New Section 99B inserted through Finance Supplementary (Second Amendment) Act, 2019.
The words “Federal Government” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
New section 99C inserted through Finance Act, 2019
The words “Federal Government” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
The words “Federal Government” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
New section 99D inserted by the Finance Act, 2023.
(b) determine windfall income, profits or gains and economic factor or
factors including but not limited to international price fluctuation having
bearing on any commodity price in Pakistan or any sector of the
economy or difference in income, profit or gains on account of foreign
currency fluctuation;
(c) provide the rate not exceeding fifty percent of such income, profits or
gains;
(d) provide for the scope, time and payment of tax payable under this
section in such manner and with such conditions as may be specified
in the notification; and
(e) exempt any person or classes of persons, any income or classes of
income from the application of this section, subject to any conditions
as may be specified in the notification.
(3) The Federal Government shall place before the National Assembly
the notification issued under this section within ninety days of the issuance of such
notification or by the 30th day of June of the financial year, whichever is earlier.]
