PART X
TAX CREDITS
61. Charitable donations.—1[(1) A person shall be entitled to a tax credit in
respect of any sum paid, or any property given by the person in the tax year as a
donation 2[, voluntary contribution or subscription] to —
(a) any board of education or any university in Pakistan established
by, or under, a Federal or a Provincial law;
(b) any educational institution, hospital or relief fund established or
run in Pakistan by Federal Government or a Provincial
Government or a3[Local Government]; or
(c) any non-profit organization 4[or any person eligible for tax credit
under section 100C of this Ordinance; or
(d) entities, organizations and funds mentioned in the Thirteenth
Schedule to this Ordinance.]
(2) The amount of a person’s tax credit allowed under sub-section (1) for
a tax year shall be computed according to the following formula, namely:—
(A/B) x C
where —
A is the amount of tax assessed to the person for the tax year before allowance
of any tax credit under this Part;
Sub-section (1) substituted by the Finance Act, 2003. The substituted sub-section (1) read as
follows:
“(1) A person shall be entitled to a tax credit for a tax year in respect of any amount paid, or
property given by the person in the tax year as a donation to a non-profit organization.”
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier this insertion was made through Tax Laws (Second
Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
The words “local authority” substituted by the Finance Act, 2008.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier this insertion was made through Tax Laws (Second
Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
B is the person’s taxable income for the tax year; and
C is the lesser of —
(a) the total amount of the person’s donations referred to in sub-
section (1) in the year, including the fair market value of any
property given; or
(b) where the person is —
(i) an individual or association of persons, thirty per cent of
the taxable income of the person for the year; or
(ii) a company, 1[twenty] per cent of the taxable income of
the person for the year 2[:
Provided that where any sum is paid or any property is given to
an associate by a donor, clause (b) of component C shall be, in the
case of –
(i) an individual or association of persons, fifteen percent of
the taxable income of the person for the year; or
(ii) a company, ten percent of the taxable income of the
person for the year.]
(3) For the purposes of clause (a) of component C of the formula in sub-
section (2), the fair market value of any property given shall be determined at the
time it is given.
(4) A cash amount paid by a person as a donation shall be taken into
account under clause (a) of component C3[of]sub-section (2) only if it was paid by
a crossed cheque drawn on a bank.
4[(5) The 5[Board] may make rules regulating the procedure of the grant of
approval under sub-clause (c) of clause (36) of section 2 and any other matter
connected with, or incidental to, the operation of this section.]
6[ ]
The word “fifteen” substituted by the Finance Act, 2009.
Full stop substituted by colon and thereafter new proviso added through Finance Act, 2020 dated
30th June, 2020
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2002.
Added by the Finance Act, 2003.
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
Section 62 substituted by the Finance Act, 2011. The substituted section 62 read as follows:
“62. Investment in shares.— (1) A person 6[other than a company] shall be entitled to a tax credit for a tax year in respect
of the cost of acquiring in the year new shares offered to the public by a public company listed on a stock exchange in Pakistan
1[ ]
where the person 6[other than a company] is the original allottee of the shares or the shares are acquired from the Privatization
Commission of Pakistan.
(2) The amount of a person’s tax credit allowed under sub-section (1) for a tax year shall
be computed according to the following formula, namely: —
(A/B) x C
where –
A is the amount of tax assessed to the person for the tax year before allowance of any tax credit
under this Part;
B is the person’s taxable income for the tax year; and
C is the lesser of —
(a) the total cost of acquiring the shares referred to in sub-section (1) in the year;
(b) ten per cent of the person’s 6[taxable] income for the year; or
(c) 6[ 6[three] hundred] thousand rupees.
(3) Where –
(a) a person has 6[been allowed] a tax credit under sub-section (1) in a tax year in
respect of the purchase of a share; and
(b) the person has made a disposal of the share within twelve months of the date
of acquisition,
the amount of tax payable by the person for the tax year in which the shares were disposed of shall
be increased by the amount of the credit allowed.”
Section 62 omitted by the Finance Act, 2022. Omitted section read as follows:
“62. Tax credit for investment in shares and insurance. — (1) A resident person other than a company
shall be entitled to a tax credit for a tax year either—
(i) in respect of the cost of acquiring in the year new shares offered to the public by a
public company listed on a stock exchange in Pakistan, provided the resident person
is the original allottee of the shares or the shares are acquired from the Privatization
Commission of Pakistan;1[ ]
1[(ia) in respect of cost of acquiring in the tax year, sukuks offered to the public by a public
company listed and traded on stock exchange in Pakistan, provided the resident
person is the original allottee of the sukuks; 1[ ] ]
1[(ib) in respect of cost of acquiring in the tax year, unit of exchange traded fund offered
to public and traded on stock exchange in Pakistan; or]
(ii) in respect of any life insurance premium paid on a policy to a life insurance company
registered by the Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan under the
Insurance Ordinance, 2000 (XXXIX of 2000), provided the resident person is
deriving income chargeable to tax under the head “salary” or “income from
business1[:]
1[Provided that where tax credit has been allowed under this clause and
subsequently the insurance policy is surrendered within two years of its acquisition,
the tax credit allowed shall be deemed to have been wrongly allowed and the
Commissioner, notwithstanding anything contained in this Ordinance, shall re-
compute the tax payable by the taxpayer for the relevant tax years and the
provisions of this Ordinance, shall, so far as may, apply accordingly. ]
(2) The amount of a person’s tax credit allowed under sub-section (1) for a tax year shall be
computed according to the following formula, namely: —
(A/B) x C
where—
A is the amount of tax assessed to the person for the tax year before allowance
of any tax credit under this Part;
B is the person’s taxable income for the tax year; and
C is the lesser of —
(a) the total cost of acquiring the shares,1[or sukuks], or the total
contribution or premium paid by the person referred to in sub-section (1)
in the year;
1[ ]
2[ ]
3[63. Contribution to an Approved Pension Fund.— (1) An eligible person as
defined in sub-section (19A) of section 2 deriving income chargeable to tax under the
(b) 1[twenty] per cent of the person’s taxable income for the year; or
(c) 1[ ] 1[ ] 1[two] million rupees].
(3) Where —
(a) a person has been allowed a tax credit under sub-section (1) in a tax year in
respect of the purchase of a share; and
(b) the person has made a disposal of the share within 1[twenty-four] months of the
date of acquisition, the amount of tax payable by the person for the tax year in
which the shares were disposed of shall be increased by the amount of the
credit allowed.”
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2016.
Section 62A omitted by the Finance Act, 2022. The omitted section read as follows:
“62A. Tax credit for investment in health insurance.— (1) A resident person 2[ ] other than a
company shall be entitled to a tax credit for a tax year in respect of any health insurance premium or
contribution paid to any insurance company registered by the Securities and Exchange Commission of
Pakistan under the Insurance Ordinance, 2000 (XXXIX of 2000), provided the resident person 2[ ] is
deriving income chargeable to tax under the head “salary” or “income from business”.
(2) The amount of a person’s tax credit allowed under sub-section (1) for a tax year shall
be computed according to the following formula, namely: —
(A/B) x C
where—
A is the amount of tax assessed to the person for the tax year before allowance of tax
credit under this section;
B is the person’s taxable income for the tax year; and
C is the lesser of —
(a) the total contribution or premium paid by the person referred to in sub-section
(1) in the year;
(a) five per cent of the person’s taxable income for the year; and
(b) one hundred2[and fifty] thousand rupees.”
Section 63 substituted by the Finance Act, 2005. The original section 63 read as follows:
“63. Retirement annuity scheme. – (1) Subject to sub-section (3), a resident individual deriving
income chargeable to tax under the head “Salary” or the head “Income from Business” shall be
entitled to a tax credit for a tax year in respect of any contribution or premium paid in the year by the
person under a contract of annuity scheme approved by, Securities and Exchange Commission of
head “Salary” or the head “Income from Business” shall be entitled to a tax credit for a
tax year in respect of any contribution or premium paid in the year by the person in
approved pension fund under the Voluntary Pension System Rules, 2005.
(2) The amount of a person’s tax credit allowed under sub-section (1) for
a tax year shall be computed according to the following formula, namely: —
(A/B) x C
Where.-
A is the amount of tax assessed to the person for the tax year, before
allowance of any tax credit under this Part;
B is the person’s taxable income for the tax year; and
C is the lesser of —
(i) the total contribution or premium referred to in sub-section (1)
paid by the person in the year; or
(ii) twenty per cent of the 1[eligible] person’s taxable income for the
relevant tax year; Provided that 2[an eligible person] joining the
pension fund at the age of forty-one years or above, during the
first ten years 3[starting from July 1, 2006] shall be allowed
Pakistan] of an insurance company duly registered under the Insurance Ordinance, 2000 (XXXIX of
2000), having its main object the provision to the person of an annuity in old age.
(2) The amount of a resident individual’s tax credit allowed under sub-section (1) for a tax
year shall be computed according to the following formula, namely: –
(A/B) x C
where –
A is the amount of tax assessed to the person for the tax year before allowance of any tax credit
under this Part;
B is the person’s taxable income for the tax year; and
C is the lesser of –
(a) the total contribution or premium referred to in sub-section (1) paid by the
individual in the year;
(b) ten per cent of the person’s taxable income for the tax year; or
(c) two hundred thousand rupees.
(3) A person shall not be entitled to a tax credit under sub-section (1) in respect of a contract
of annuity which provides –
(a) for the payment during the life of the person of any amount besides an annuity;
(b) for the annuity payable to the person to commence before the person attains
the age of sixty years;
(c) that the annuity is capable, in whole or part, of surrender, commutation,
or assignment; or for payment of the annuity outside Pakistan.”
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2006.
The words “a person” substituted by the Finance Act, 2006.
The words, figure and commas “of the notification of the Voluntary Pension System Rules, 2005,”
substituted by the Finance Act, 2006.
additional contribution of 2% per annum for each year of age
exceeding forty years. Provided further that the total
contribution allowed to such person shall not exceed 50% of the
total taxable income of the preceding year 1[2[:] ] ]
3[Provided also that the additional contribution of two percent
per annum for each year of age exceeding forty years shall be
allowed up to the 30th June, 2019 subject to the condition that
the total contribution allowed to such person shall not exceed
thirty percent of the total taxable income of the preceding year.”]
4[ ]
5[(3) The transfer by the members of approved employment pension or
annuity scheme or approved occupational saving scheme of their existing balance
to their individual pension accounts maintained with one or more pension fund
managers shall not qualify for tax credit under this section.]
6[63A. Tax credit for interest paid on low-cost housing loan. — (1) An individual
shall be entitled to a tax credit for a tax year in respect of any profit on debt or
share in rent or share in appreciation for value of house paid by the person in the
year on a loan by a scheduled bank or any other financial institution regulated by
the Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan or advanced by Government
or the Local Government or a statutory body or a public company listed on a
registered stock exchange in Pakistan where the person utilizes the loan for the
construction (including land) or acquisition of one personal house having land area
up to two thousand five hundred square feet or flat having total area up to two
thousand square feet.
(2) The amount of a person‘s tax credit allowed under sub-section (1) for a
tax year shall be computed according to the following formula, namely: —
(A/B) x C
where —
A is the amount of tax assessed to the person for the tax year before
allowance of any tax credit under this Part;
B is the person‘s taxable income for the tax year; and
The semi-colon and the word “or” substituted by the Finance Act, 2011.
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2016.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2016.
Clause (iii) omitted by the Finance Act, 2011. The omitted clause (iii) read as follows:
“(iii) five hundred thousand rupees.”
Added by the Finance Act, 2006.
Section 63A inserted by the Finance Act, 2025.
C is the lesser of —
(a) the total profit on debt referred to in sub-section (1) paid by the
person in the year; or
(b) thirty per cent of the person‘s taxable income for the year.
(3) The person shall not be entitled to tax credit under this section for any
profit deductible under section 15A.
(4) Where an individual has claimed tax credit under this section, he shall
not be entitled to claim tax credit for another house or flat under this section during
the subsequent fifteen tax years.]
1[ ]
2[ ]
3[ ]
4[ ]
5[64B. Tax credit for employment generation by manufacturers.—(1) Where a
taxpayer being a company formed for establishing and operating a new
manufacturing unit sets up a new manufacturing unit between the 1st day of July,
Section 64 omitted by the Finance Act, 2015. Omitted section read as follows:-
“64. Profit on debt.—1[(1) A person shall be entitled to a tax credit for a tax year in respect of any
profit or share in rent and share in appreciation for value of house paid by the person in the year on a
loan by a scheduled bank or non-banking finance institution regulated by the Securities and Exchange
Commission of Pakistan or advanced by Government or the1[Local Government] 1[or a statutory body
or a public company listed on a registered stock exchange in Pakistan] where the person utilizes the
loan for the construction of a new house or the acquisition of a house.]
(2) The amount of a person’s tax credit allowed under sub-section (1) for a tax year shall
be computed according to the following formula, namely:—
(A/B) x C
where —
A is the amount of tax assessed to the person for the tax year before allowance of any tax credit
under this Part;
B is the person’s taxable income for the tax year; and
C is the lesser of —
(a) the total profit referred to in sub-section (1) paid by the person in the year;
(b) 1[fifty] per cent of the person’s 1[taxable] income for the year; or
(c) 1[seven hundred and fifty] thousand rupees.
(3) A person is not entitled to 1[tax credit]under this section for any profit deductible under
section 17.”
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2016.
Section 64A is re-numbered as section 60C by Finance Act, 2017
Section 64AB is re-numbered as section 60D by Finance Act, 2017
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2015.
2015 and the 30th day of June, 1[2019], (both days inclusive) it shall be given a tax
credit for a period of ten years.
(2) The tax credit under sub-section (1) for a tax year shall be equal to
2[two] percent of the tax payable for every fifty employees registered with The
Employees Old Age Benefits Institution or the Employees Social Security
Institutions of Provincial Governments during the tax year, subject to a maximum
of ten percent of the tax payable.
(3) Tax credit under this section shall be admissible where—
(a) the company is incorporated and manufacturing unit is setup
between the first day of July, 2015 and the 30th day of June,
2018, both days inclusive;
(b) employs more than fifty employees in a tax year registered with
The Employees Old Age Benefits Institution and the Employees
Social Security Institutions of Provincial Governments;
(c) manufacturing unit is managed by a company formed for
operating the said manufacturing unit and registered under the
3[Companies Act, 2017 (XIX of 2017)] and having its registered
office in Pakistan; and
(d) the manufacturing unit is not established by the splitting up or
reconstruction or reconstitution of an undertaking already in
existence or by transfer of machinery or plant from an
undertaking established in Pakistan at any time before the1st
July 2015.
(4) Where any credit is allowed under this section and subsequently it is
discovered, on the basis of documents or otherwise, by the Commissioner that any
of the conditions specified in this section were not fulfilled, the credit originally
allowed shall be deemed to have been wrongly allowed and the Commissioner
may, notwithstanding anything contained in this Ordinance, re-compute the tax
payable by the taxpayer for the relevant year and the provisions of this Ordinance
shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly.
(5) For the purposes of this section, a manufacturing unit shall be treated
to have been setup on the date on which the manufacturing unit is ready to go into
production, whether trial production or commercial production.”]
The figure “2018” substituted by the Finance Act, 2016.
The word “one” substituted by the Finance Act, 2016.
The expression “Companies Ordinance, 1984 (XLVII of 1984)” substituted by the Finance Act,
2021.
1[ ]
2[ ]
3[64D. Tax credit for point of sale machine.—(1) Any person who is required to
integrate with Board’s computerized system for real time reporting of sale or
receipt, shall be entitled to tax credit in respect of the amount invested in purchase
of point of sale machine.
(2) The amount of tax credit allowed under sub-section (1) for a tax year in
which point of sale machine is installed, integrated and configured with the Board’s
computerized system shall be lesser of—
(a) amount actually invested in purchase of point of sale machine; or
(b) rupees one hundred and fifty thousand per machine.
(3) For the purpose of this section, the term point of sale machine means a
machine meant for processing and recording the sale transactions for goods or
services, either in cash or through credit and debit cards or online payments in an
internet enabled environment.]
New sub-section 64C inserted by the Finance Act, 2019.
Section 64C omitted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier this omission was made through Tax Laws
(Second Amendment) Ordinance, 2021. The omitted section read as follows:
“64C. Tax credit for persons employing fresh graduates.– (1) A person employing freshly qualified
graduates from a university or institution recognized by Higher Education Commission shall be entitled
to a tax credit in respect of the amount of annual salary paid to the freshly qualified graduates for a
tax year in which such graduates are employed.
(2) The amount of tax credit allowed under sub-section (1) for a tax year shall be computed
according to the following formula, namely:-
(A/B) x C
where-
A is the amount of tax assessed to the person for the tax year before allowance
of tax credit under this section;
B is the person’s taxable income for the tax year; and
C is the lessor of –
(a) the annual salary paid to the freshly qualified graduates referred to in sub-
section (1) in the year; and
(b) five percent of the person’s taxable income for the year;
(3) The tax credit shall be allowed for salary paid to the number of freshly qualified
graduates not exceeding fifteen percent of the total employees of the company in the tax year.
(4) In this section, “freshly qualified graduate” means a person who has graduated after the
first day of July, 2017 from any institute or university recognized by the Higher Education Commission.”
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2021.
65. Miscellaneous provisions relating to tax credits.— (1) Where the
person entitled to a tax credit under 1[this]Part is a member of an association of
persons to which sub-section (1) of section 92 applies, the following shall apply—
(a) component A of the formula in sub-section (2) of section 61, sub-
section (2) of section 62, sub-section (2) of section 63 and sub-
section (2) of section 64 shall be the amount of tax that would be
assessed to the individual if any amount derived in the year that is
exempt from tax under sub-section (1) of section 92 were chargeable
to tax; and
(b) component B of the formula in sub-section (2) of section 61, sub-
section (2) of section 62, sub-section (2) of section 63 and sub-
section (2) of section 64 shall be the taxable income of the individual
for the year if any amount derived in the year that is exempt from tax
under sub-section (1) of section 92 were chargeable to tax.
(2) Any tax credit allowed under this Part shall be applied in accordance
with sub-section (3) of section 4.
(3) Subject to sub-section (4), any tax credit or part of a tax credit allowed
to a person under this Part for a tax year that is not able to be credited under sub-
section (3) of section 4 for the year shall not be refunded, carried forward to a
subsequent tax year, or carried back to a preceding tax year.
(4) Where the person to whom sub-section (3) applies is a member of an
association of persons to which sub-section (1) of section 92 applies, the amount
of any excess credit under sub-section (3) for a tax year may be claimed as a tax
credit by the association for that year.
(5) Sub-section (4) applies only where the member and the association
agree in writing for the sub-section to apply and such agreement in writing must
be furnished with the association’s return of income for that year.
2[(6) Where the person is entitled to a tax credit under section 65B, 65D or
65E, provisions of clause (d) of sub-section (2) of section 169 and clause (d) of
sub-section (1) of section 113 shall not apply.]
3[ ]
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2002
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2015
Section 65A omitted by the Finance Act, 2017, Omitted section reads as follows:
3[65A. Tax credit to a person registered under the Sales Tax Act, 1990. — (1) Every manufacturer,
registered under the Sales Tax Act, 1990, shall be entitled to a tax credit of 3[“three”] per cent of tax
1[65B. Tax credit for investment.— (1) Where a taxpayer being a company
invests any amount in the purchase of plant and machinery, for the purposes of
2[extension, expansion,] balancing, modernization and replacement of the plant
and machinery, already installed therein, in an industrial undertaking set up in
Pakistan and owned by it, credit equal to ten per cent of the amount so invested
shall be allowed against the tax payable 3[, including on account of minimum tax
and final taxes payable under any of the provisions of this Ordinance,] by it in the
manner hereinafter provided 4[:]
5[Provided that for the tax year 2019 the rate of credit shall be equal to five
percent of the amount so invested:
Provided further that the provisions of sub-section (5) relating to carry
forward of the credit to be deducted from tax payable, to the following tax years,
as specified in the said sub-section, shall continue to apply after tax year 2019;
and]
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply if the plant and machinery
is purchased and installed at any time between the first day of July, 2010, and the
30th day of June, 6[ ] 7[ ] 8[2019].
(3) The amount of credit admissible under this section shall be deducted
from the tax payable by the taxpayer in respect of the tax year in which the plant
or machinery in the purchase of which the amount referred to in sub-section (1) is
invested and installed.
payable for a tax year, if ninety per cent of his sales are to the person who is registered under the
aforesaid Act during the said tax year.
(2) For claiming of the credit, the person shall provide complete details of the persons to whom
the sales were made.
(3) No credit will be allowed to a person whose income is covered under final tax or minimum
tax.
(4) Carry forward of any amount where full credit may not be allowed against the tax liability for
the tax year, shall not be allowed.
Added by the Finance Act, 2010.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2012.
The coma and words inserted by Finance Act, 2012
Full stop” substituted by “colon” by the Finance Act, 2019
New provisos added by the Finance Act, 2019
The figure “2015” substituted by Finance Act, 2015.
The figure “2016” substituted by the Finance Act, 2016.
The figure “2021” substituted by Finance Act, 2019.
1[(4) The provisions of this section shall mutatis mutandis apply to a company
setup in Pakistan before the first day of July, 2011, which makes investment, through
hundred per cent new equity, during first day of July, 2011 and 30th day of June, 2016,
for the purposes of balancing, modernization and replacement of the plant and
machinery already installed in an industrial undertaking owned by the company.
However, credit equal to twenty per cent of the amount so invested shall be allowed
against the tax payable, including on account of minimum tax and final taxes payable
under any of the provisions of this Ordinance. The credit shall be allowed in the year in
which the plant and machinery in the purchase of which the investment as aforesaid is
made, is installed therein.
“Explanation.— For the purpose of this section the term “new equity” shall,
have the same meaning as defined in sub-section (7) of section 65E.]
2[(5) Where no tax is payable by the taxpayer in respect of the tax year in
which such plant or machinery is installed, or where the tax payable is less than
the amount of credit as aforesaid, the amount of the credit or so much of it as is in
excess thereof, as the case may be, shall be carried forward and deducted from
the tax payable by the taxpayer in respect of the following tax year and so on, but
no such amount shall be carried forward for more than two tax years in the case
of investment referred to in sub-section (1) and for more than five tax years in
respect of investment referred to in sub-section (4), however, the deduction made
under this section shall not exceed in aggregate the limit specified in sub-section
(1) or sub-section (4), as the case may be.]
3[(6) Where any credit is allowed under this section and subsequently it is
discovered by the Commissioner Inland Revenue that any one or more of the
conditions specified in this section was, or were, not fulfilled, as the case may be,
the credit originally allowed shall be deemed to have been wrongly allowed and
the Commissioner, notwithstanding anything contained in this Ordinance, shall re-
compute the tax payable by the taxpayer for the relevant year and the provisions
of this Ordinance shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly.]
Sub-section (4) substituted by the Finance Act, 2012. The substituted sub-section (4) read as follows:
“(4) Where no tax is payable by the taxpayer in respect of the tax year in which such plant
or machinery is installed, or where the tax payable is less than the amount of credit, the amount of
the credit or so much of it as is in excess thereof, as the case may be, shall be carried forward and
deducted from the tax payable by the taxpayer in respect of the following tax year, and so on, but no
such amount shall be carried forward for more than two tax years, however, the deduction made
under sub-section (2) and this sub-section shall not exceed in aggregate the limit specified in sub-
section (1).”
Sub-section (5) substituted by the Finance Act, 2012. The substituted sub-section (5) read as follows:
“(5) Where any credit is allowed under this section and subsequently it is discovered by the
Commissioner Inland Revenue that any one or more of the conditions specified in this section was,
or were, not fulfilled, as the case may be, the credit originally allowed shall be deemed to have been
wrongly allowed and the Commissioner Inland Revenue may, notwithstanding anything contained in
this Ordinance, re-compute the tax payable by the taxpayer for the relevant year and the provisions
of this Ordinance shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly.”
Added by the Finance Act, 2012.
1[ ]
2[ ]
3[ ]
4[ ]
Added by the Finance Act, 2010.
Section 65C omitted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier this omission was made through Tax Laws
(Second Amendment) Ordinance, 2021. The omitted section read as follows:
65C. Tax credit for enlistment. —(1) Where a taxpayer being a company opts for enlistment in any
registered stock exchange in Pakistan2[on or before the 30th day of June, 2022] a tax credit equal to
2[twenty] percent of the tax payable shall be allowed for the tax year in which the said company is
enlisted 2[“and for the following 2[three tax years:]
[Provided that the tax credit for the last two years shall be ten per cent of the tax payable.]
Added by the Finance Act, 2011.
Section 65D omitted by the Finance Act, 2021. The omitted section read as follows:
“65D. Tax credit for newly established industrial undertakings. — (1) Where a taxpayer being a
company formed for establishing and operating a new industrial undertaking 4[including corporate
dairy farming] sets up a new industrial undertaking4[including a corporate dairy farm], it shall be given
a tax credit equal to 4[“an amount as computed in sub-section (1A)”] of the tax payable 4[,
including on account of minimum tax and final taxes payable under any of the provisions of this
Ordinance,] on the taxable income arising from such industrial undertaking for a period of five years
beginning from the date of setting up or commencement of commercial production, whichever is
later.
4[“(1A) The amount of a person’s tax credit allowed under sub-section (1) for a tax year shall
be computed according to the following formula, namely: —
A x (B/C)
where—
A is the amount of tax assessed to the person for the tax year before
allowance of any tax credit for the tax year;
B is the equity raised through issuance of new shares for cash consideration;
and
C is the total amount invested in setting up the new industrial undertaking.”]
(2) Tax credit under this section shall be admissible where—
(a) the company is incorporated and industrial undertaking is setup between the
first day of July, 2011 and 30th day of June, 4[4[“2021”]];
(b) industrial undertaking is managed by a company formed for operating the
said industrial undertaking and registered under the Companies
Ordinance, 1984 (XLVII of 1984) and having its registered office in
Pakistan;
(c) the industrial undertaking is not established by the splitting up or reconstruction
or reconstitution of an undertaking already in existence or by transfer of
machinery or plant from an industrial undertaking established in Pakistan at any
time before 1st July 2011; and
(d) the industrial undertaking is set up with 4[“at least seventy per cent”]
equity4[raised through issuance of new shares for cash consideration:]
Provided that short term loans and finances obtained from banking companies or non-banking
financial institutions for the purposes of meeting working capital requirements shall not disqualify the
taxpayer from claiming tax credit under this section.]
[ ]
(4) Where any credit is allowed under this section and subsequently it is discovered, on the
basis of documents or otherwise, by the Commissioner Inland Revenue that4[“the business has been
discontinued in the subsequent five years after the credit has been allowed or”] any of the 4[conditions]
specified in this section [were] not fulfilled, the credit originally allowed shall be deemed to have been
wrongly allowed and the Commissioner Inland Revenue may, notwithstanding anything contained in
1[65E. Tax credit for industrial undertakings established before the first day
of July, 2011.—2[(1) Where a taxpayer being a company, setup in Pakistan before
the first day of July, 2011, invests any amount, with 3[at least seventy per cent]
new equity raised through issuance of new shares, in the purchase and installation
of plant and machinery for an industrial undertaking, including corporate dairy
farming, for the purposes of-
(i) expansion of the plant and machinery already installed therein; or
(ii) undertaking a new project,
a tax credit shall be allowed against the tax payable in the manner provided in sub-
section (2) and sub-section (3), as the case may be, for a period of five years
beginning from the date of setting up or commencement of commercial production
from the new plant or expansion project, whichever is later.]
4[(2) Where a taxpayer maintains separate accounts of an expansion
project or a new project, as the case may be, the taxpayer shall be allowed a tax
credit equal to one 5[an amount as computed in sub-section (3A)] of the tax
payable, including minimum tax and final taxes payable under any of the provisions
of this Ordinance, attributable to such expansion project or new project.]
6[(3) In all other cases, the credit under 7[sub-section (3A)] shall be such
proportion of the tax payable, including minimum tax and final taxes payable under
this Ordinance, re-compute the tax payable by the taxpayer for the relevant year and the provisions of
this Ordinance shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly.]
[(5) For the purposes of this section and sections 65B and 65E, an industrial undertaking
shall be treated to have been setup on the date on which the industrial undertaking is ready to go into
production, whether trial production or commercial production.]
Added by the Finance Act, 2011.
Sub-section (1) substituted by the Finance Act, 2012. The substituted sub-section (1) read as
follows:
“(1) Where a taxpayer being a company invests any amount, with hundred per cent equity
investment, in the purchase and installation of plant and machinery for the purposes of balancing,
modernization, replacement, or for expansion of the plant and machinery already installed in an
industrial undertaking setup in Pakistan before the first day of July 2011, a tax credit shall be allowed
against the tax payable in the manner provided hereinafter, in the same proportion, which exists
between the total investment and such equity investment made by the industrial undertaking.”
The words “hundred per cent” substituted by the Finance Act, 2016.
Sub-section (2) substituted by the Finance Act, 2012. The substituted sub-section (1) read as
follows:
“(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply if the plant and machinery is purchased and
installed at any time between the first day of July, 2011, and the 30th day of June, 2016.”
The words “hundred per cent” substituted by the Finance Act, 2016.
Sub-section (3) substituted by the Finance Act, 2012. The substituted sub-section (1) read as
follows:
“(3) The amount of credit admissible under this section shall be deducted from the tax payable
by the taxpayer in respect of the tax year in which the plant or machinery referred in sub-section (1)
is purchased and installed and for the subsequent four years.”
The words “this section” substituted by the Finance Act, 2016.
any of the provisions of this Ordinance, as is the proportion between the new equity
and the total equity including new equity.]
1[(3A) The amount of a person’s tax credit allowed under sub-section (1) for
a tax year shall be computed according to the following formula, namely: —
A x (B/C)
where—
A is the amount of tax assessed to the person for the tax year before
allowance of any tax credit for the tax year;
B is the equity raised through issuance of new shares for cash
consideration; and
C is the total amount invested in the purchase and installation of plant
and machinery for the industrial undertaking.]
2[(4) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply if the plant and machinery
is installed at any time between the first day of July, 2011 and the 30th day of June,
3[ 4[2021] .]
5[(5) The amount of credit admissible under this section shall be deducted
from the tax payable, including minimum tax and final taxes payable under any of
the provisions of this Ordinance, by the taxpayer 6[, for a period of five years
beginning from the date of setting up or commencement of commercial production
from the new plant or expansion project, whichever is later.]
7[(6)] Where any credit is allowed under this section and subsequently it is
discovered, on the basis of documents or otherwise, by the Commissioner Inland
Revenue that 8[“the business has been discontinued in the subsequent five years
after the credit has been allowed or”]any of the condition specified in this section
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2016.
Sub-section (4) substituted by the Finance Act, 2012. The substituted sub-section (1) read as follows:
“(4) Where no tax is payable by the taxpayer in respect of the tax year in which such plant or
machinery is installed, or where the tax payable is less than the amount of tax credit, the amount of
such credit or so much of it as is in excess thereof, shall be carried forward and deducted from the
tax payable by the taxpayer in respect of the following tax year:
Provided that no such amount shall be carried forward for more than four tax years:
Provided further that deduction made under sub-section (1) and under this sub-section
shall not exceed in aggregate the limit of the tax credit specified in sub-section (1).”
The figure “2016” substituted by the Finance Act, 2016.
The figure “2019” substituted by Finance Act, 2018.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2012.
6 The words “in respect of the tax year in which the plant or machinery referred to in sub-section (1) is
installed and for the subsequent four years” substituted by Finance Act, 2015.
Sub-section (5) renumbered by the Finance Act, 2012.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2016.
was not fulfilled, the credit originally allowed shall be deemed to have been wrongly
allowed and the Commissioner Inland Revenue may, notwithstanding anything
contained in this Ordinance, re-compute the tax payable by the taxpayer for the
relevant year and the provisions of this Ordinance shall apply accordingly.
1 [(7) For the purposes of this section, ‘new equity’ means equity raised
through fresh issue of shares against cash by the company and shall not include
loans obtained from shareholders or directors:
Provided that short term loans and finances obtained from banking
companies or non-banking financial institutions for the purposes of meeting
working capital requirements shall not disqualify the taxpayer from claiming
tax credit under this section.]
2[65F. Tax credit for certain persons.– (1) Following persons or incomes shall
be allowed a tax credit equal to one hundred per cent of the tax payable under any
provisions of this Ordinance including minimum, alternate corporate tax and final
taxes for the period, to the extent, upon fulfillment of conditions and subject to
limitations detailed as under:-
3[(a) persons engaged in coal mining projects in Sindh, to the extent, the
income is derived from supplying coal to power generation projects.]
(b) a startup as defined in clause (62A) of section 2 for the tax year in which
the startup is certified by the Pakistan Software Export Board and the
next following two tax years 4[.]
5[Explanation. – For the removal of doubt it is clarified that tax credit under
clause (a) shall only be available to the income derived from the operations
of coal mining projects in Sindh supplying coal to power generation
projects.]
6[ ]
(2) The tax credit under sub-section (1) shall be available subject to
fulfillment of the following conditions, where applicable, namely:-
Added by the Finance Act, 2012.
Sections 65F and 65G inserted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier this insertion was made through
Tax Laws (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
Clause (a) substituted by the Finance Act, 2025. The substituted clause (a) read as follows:
“(a) persons engaged in coal mining projects in Sindh supplying coal exclusively to power generation
projects;”
Expression “; and” substituted by the Finance Act, 2024.
Explanation inserted by the Finance Act, 2024.
Clause (c) omitted by the Finance Act, 2022. The omitted clause read as follows:
“(c) Income from exports of computer software or IT services or IT enabled services as defined in
clause (30AD) and (30AE) of section 2 upto the period ending on the 30th day of June, 2025:
Provided that eighty percent of the export proceeds is brought into Pakistan in foreign
exchange remitted from outside Pakistan through normal banking channels.”
(a) return has been filed;
(b) withholding tax statements for the relevant tax year have been filed in
respect of those provisions of the Ordinance, where the person is a
withholding agent; and
(c) sales tax returns for the tax periods corresponding to relevant tax year
have been filed if the person is required to file Sales Tax Return under
any of the Federal or Provincial sales tax laws.
65G. Tax credit for specified industrial undertakings.- (1) When making certain
eligible capital investments as specified in sub-section (2), the eligible taxpayers
defined in sub-section (3) shall be allowed to take an investment tax credit of
twenty five percent of the eligible investment amount, against tax payable under
the provisions of this Ordinance including minimum and final taxes. The tax credit
not fully adjusted during the year of investment shall be carried forward to the
subsequent tax year subject to the condition that it may be carried forward for a
period not exceeding two years.
(2) For the purposes of this section, the eligible investment means
investment made in purchase and installation of new machinery, buildings,
equipment, hardware and software, except self-created software and used capital
goods.
(3) For the purpose of this section, eligible person means —
(a) green field industrial undertaking as defined in clause (27A) of
section 2 engaged in —
(i) the manufacture of goods or materials or the subjection of goods
or materials to any process which substantially changes their
original condition; or
(ii) ship building:
Provided that the person incorporated between the 30th
day of June, 2019 and the 30th day of June, 2024 and the
person is not formed by the splitting up or reconstitution of an
undertaking already in existence or by transfer of machinery,
plant or building from an undertaking established in Pakistan
prior to commencement of the new business and is not part of
an expansion project; and
(b) industrial undertaking set up by the 30th day of June 2023 and
engaged in the manufacture of plant, machinery, equipment and
items with dedicated use (no multiple uses) for generation of
renewable energy from sources like solar and wind, for a period of
five years beginning from the date such industrial undertaking is set
up.]
1[ ]
Section 65H shall be omitted and shall be deemed to have been omitted with effect from 2nd March,
2022 through Finance Act, 2022. The omitted section read as follows:
"65H. Tax credit for foreign investment for industrial promotion.- (I) Where a taxpayer being —
(a) a non-resident Pakistani citizen having continued non-residential status for more than five
years; or
(b) a resident individual having foreign assets declared in terms of section 116 or 116A by the
31" December, 2021,
invests in a company incorporated on or after the 1st March, 2022, to set up an industrial undertaking
in Pakistan with equity, not less than fifty million rupees, with funds remitted into Pakistan through
proper banking channel as per the procedure to be prescribed by the State Bank of Pakistan, at any
time up to the 31st December, 2022, that company shall be entitled to a one-time tax credit equal to one
hundred percent of the amount remitted and credited in rupees in the bank account of such company
against tax liability for the tax year in which commercial production commences.
(2) Where no tax is payable by the taxpayer in respect of the tax year in which the commercial
production has commenced or where the tax payable is less than the amount of credit as aforesaid,
the amount of the credit or so much of it as is in excess thereof, as the case may be, shall be carried
forward and deducted from the tax payable by the taxpayer in respect of the following tax year and so
on, but no such amount shall be carried forward for more than five tax years in the case of investment
referred to in sub-section (1), however, the deduction made under this section shall not exceed in
aggregate the limit specified in sub-section (1).
(3) This section shall not apply to a company or an industrial undertaking established by splitting
up or reconstitution of a company or an industrial undertaking already in existence or by transfer of
machinery or plant from an industrial undertaking established at any time before the 1st March, 2022.
(4) The provisions of sub-section ( I) shall apply if commercial production commences by the
30th June, 2024.
(5) Where any credit is allowed under this section and subsequently it is discovered by the
Commissioner Inland Revenue that any one or more of the conditions specified in this section was or
were not fulfilled, as the case may be, the credit originally allowed shall be deemed to have been
wrongly allowed and the Commissioner, notwithstanding anything contained in this Ordinance, shall re-
compute the tax payable by the taxpayer for the relevant year and the provisions of this Ordinance
shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly.”
