PART IX
DEDUCTIBLE ALLOWANCES
60. Zakat.— (1) A person shall be entitled to a deductible allowance for the
amount of any Zakat paid by the person in a tax year under the Zakat and Ushr
Ordinance, 1980 (XVIII of 1980).
(2) Sub-section (1) does not apply to any Zakat taken into account under
sub-section (2) of section 40.
(3) Any allowance or part of an allowance under this section for a tax year
that is not able to be deducted under section 9 for the year shall not be refunded,
carried forward to a subsequent tax year, or carried back to a preceding tax year.
1[60A. Workers’ Welfare Fund.— A person shall be entitled to a deductible
allowance for the amount of any Workers’ Welfare Fund paid by the person in tax
year under Workers’ Welfare Fund Ordinance, 1971 (XXXVI of 1971) 2[or under
any law relating to the Workers’ Welfare Fund enacted by Provinces after the
eighteenth Constitutional amendment Act, 2010:
Provided that this section shall not apply in respect of any amount of
Workers’ Welfare Fund paid to the Provinces by a trans-provincial establishment.]
(4) The loss of the acquired company referred to in sub-section (1) shall be adjusted against
income under the head "income from business" of the acquiring company as per following formula,
namely:-
(A/I00) x B
where—
A is the percentage share capital held by the acquiring company of the acquired company; and
B is the loss of the acquired company referred to in sub-section (I).
(5) If the acquiring company fails to revive the acquired company by tax year 2026, the
acquiring company shall, in tax year 2027 offer the amount of profit on which taxes have not been paid
due to set off of losses surrendered by the acquired company.
(6) For the removal of doubt, this section shall not apply to any scheme of amalgamation
or merger.
(7) For the purposes of this section, -
(a) a sick industrial unit referred to as acquired company in sub-section (I), shall be deemed to
be revived if the said company attains maximum production capacity that was obtained before the
industrial unit vent sick:
Provided that the acquired company produces a certificate to the effect that it stands revived,
duly issued by Engineering Development Board, along with the return of income filed for tax year 2026.
(b) "sick industrial unit" means a company being an industrial undertaking, which –
(i) has accumulated losses, for a continuous period of three years prior to the I" July, 2022,
equal to or exceeding its entire capital and reserves at the time of acquisition, as the ease may be; or
(ii) has defaulted towards repayment of outstanding debts owing to banking companies or non-
banking financial institutions for a consecutive period of three years immediately before acquisition, as
the case may be, or
(iii) has been declared as such by the Federal Government in a notification published in the
official Gazette.";
Added by the Finance Act, 2003.
Added by the Finance Act, 2021.
1[60B. Workers’ Participation Fund.— A person shall be entitled to a deductible
allowance for the amount of any Workers’ Participation Fund paid by the person in
a tax year in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Profit (Workers’
Participation) Act, 1968 (XII of 1968) 2[or under any law relating to the Workers’
Profit Participation Fund enacted by Provinces after the eighteenth Constitutional
amendment Act, 2010:
Provided that this section shall not apply in respect of any amount of
Workers’ Profit Participation Fund paid to the province by a trans-provincial
establishment.]
3[ ]
4[ ]
5[60D. Deductible allowance for education expenses.— (1) Every individual
shall be entitled to a deductible allowance in respect of tuition fee paid by the
individual in a tax year provided that the taxable income of the individual is less
than one 6[and a half]million rupees.
(2) The amount of an individual‘s deductible allowance allowed under
sub-section (1) for a tax year shall not exceed the lesser of —
(a) five per cent of the total tuition fee paid by the individual referred to in
sub-section (1) in the year;
(b) twenty-five per cent of the person’s taxable income for the year; and
(c) an amount computed by multiplying sixty thousand with number of
children of the individual.
(3) Any allowance or part of an allowance under this section for a tax year
that is not able to be deducted for the year shall not be carried forward to a
subsequent tax year.
Added by the Finance Act, 2004.
Added by the Finance Act, 2021.
Section 64A is re-numbered by the Finance Act 2017.
Section 60C omitted by Finance Act, 2022 . Omitted section read as follows:
"
60C. Deductible allowance for profit on debt.— (1) Every individual shall be entitled to a
deductible allowance for the amount of any profit or share in rent and share in appreciation for value
of house paid by the individual in a tax year on a loan by a scheduled bank or non-banking finance
institution regulated by the Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan or advanced by
Government or the Local Government, Provincial Government or a statutory body or a public
company listed on a registered stock exchange in Pakistan where the individual utilizes the loan for
the construction of a new house or the acquisition of a house.
(2) The amount of an individual‘s deductible allowance allowed under sub-section (1) for a tax
year shall not exceed fifty percent of taxable income or 4[“two”] million rupees, whichever is lower.
(3) Any allowance or part of an allowance under this section for a tax year that is not able to be
deducted for the year shall not be carried forward to a subsequent tax year.”
Section 64AB is re-numbered by the Finance Act, 2017.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2017.
(4) Allowance under this section shall be allowed against the tax liability
of either of the parents making payment of the feeon furnishing national tax number
(NTN) or name of the educational institution.
(5) Allowance under this section shall not be taken into account for
computation of tax deduction under section 149.]
