PART VIII
RECORDS, INFORMATION COLLECTION AND AUDIT
174. Records.— (1) Unless otherwise authorised by the Commissioner, every
taxpayer shall maintain in Pakistan such accounts, documents and records as may
be prescribed.
(2) The Commissioner may disallow 1[or reduce] a taxpayer’s claim for a
deduction if the taxpayer is unable, without reasonable 2[cause], to provide a
receipt, or other record or evidence of the transaction or circumstances giving rise
to the claim for the deduction.
(3) The accounts and documents required to be maintained under this
section shall be maintained for 3[six]years after the end of the tax year to which
they relate 4[:]
5[Provided that where any proceeding is pending before any authority
or court the taxpayer shall maintain the record till final decision of the
proceedings.]
6[Explanation.— Pending proceedings include proceedings for assessment
or amendment of assessment, appeal, revision, reference, petition or
prosecution and any proceedings before an Alternative Dispute Resolution
Committee”] 7[:
Provided that limitation prescribed under this sub-section shall not
apply to the records pertaining to income, assets, expenses or transactions
to which clause (ii) of sub-section (2) of section 111 applies.]
8[(4) For the purpose of this section, the expression “deduction” means any
amount debited to trading account, manufacturing account, receipts and expenses
account or profit and loss account.]
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
The word “excuse” substituted by the Finance Act, 2003.
The word “five” substituted by the Finance Act, 2010.
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2010.
Added by the Finance Act, 2010.
Added by the Finance Act, 2010.
Full stop substituted and proviso added by the Finance Act, 2022.
Added by the Finance Act, 2003.
1[(5) The Commissioner may require any person to install and use an
Electronic Tax Register of such type and description as may be prescribed for the
purpose of storing and accessing information regarding any transaction that has a
bearing on the tax liability of such person.]
175. Power to enter and search premises.— (1) In order to enforce any
provision of this Ordinance (including for the purpose of making an audit of a
taxpayer or a survey of persons liable to tax), the Commissioner or any officer
authorised in writing by the Commissioner for the purposes of this section –
(a) shall, at all times and without prior notice, have full and free
access2[including real-time electronic access]to any premises, place,
accounts, documents or computer;
(b) may stamp, or make an extract or copy of any accounts, documents
or computer-stored information to which access is obtained under
clause (a);
(c) may impound any accounts or documents and retain them for so long
as may be necessary for examination or for the purposes of
prosecution;
(d) may, where a hard copy or computer disk of information stored on a
computer is not made available, impound and retain the computer for
as long as is necessary to copy the information required; and
(e) may make an inventory of any articles found in any premises or place
to which access is obtained under clause (a).
3[(2) The Commissioner may authorize any valuer or expert to enter any
premises and perform any task assigned to him by the Commissioner.]
(3) The occupier of any premises or place to which access is sought
under sub-section (1) shall provide all reasonable facilities and assistance for the
effective exercise of the right of access.
Added by the Finance Act, 2008.
2 The expression inserted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
Sub-section (2) substituted by the Finance Act, 2003. The substituted sub-section (2) read as
follows:
“(2) The Commissioner may authorise any valuer to enter any premises or place to inspect such
accounts and documents as may be necessary to enable the valuer to make a valuation of an asset
for the purposes of this Ordinance.”
(4) Any accounts, documents or computer impounded and retained under
sub-section (1) shall be signed for by the Commissioner or an authorised officer.
(5) A person whose accounts, documents or computer have been
impounded and retained under sub-section (1) may examine them and make
extracts or copies from them during regular office hours under such supervision as
the Commissioner may determine.
(6) Where any accounts, documents or computer impounded and
retained under sub-section (1) are lost or destroyed while in the possession of the
Commissioner, the Commissioner shall make reasonable compensation to the
owner of the accounts, documents or computer for the loss or destruction.
(7) This section shall have effect notwithstanding any rule of law relating
to privilege or the public interest in relation to access to premises or places, or the
production of accounts, documents or computer-stored information.
(8) In this section, “occupier” in relation to any premises or place, means
the owner, manager or any other responsible person on the premises or place.
1[(9) For the purpose of clause (a) of sub-section (1), the Board may make
rules relating to electronic real-time assess for audit or a survey of persons liable
to tax.]
2[175A. Real-time access to information and databases.- (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, including
but not limited to the National Database and Registration Authority Ordinance,
2000 (Ordinance VIII of 2000), and the Emigration Ordinance, 1979(Ordinance
XVIII of 1979), arrangements shall be made to provide real-time access of
information and database to the Board in the prescribed form and manner by-
(a) the National Database and Registration Authority with respect to
information pertaining to National Identity Card, Pakistan Origin Card,
Overseas Identity Card, Alien Registration Card, and other particulars
contained in the Citizen Database.
(b) the Federal Investigation Agency and the Bureau of Emigration and
Overseas Employment with respect to details of international travel;
(c) the Federal Investigation Agency and the Bureau of Emigration and
Overseas Employment with respect to details of international entry and
exit of all persons and information pertaining to work permits,
employment visas and immigration visas;
1 New sub-section (9) added through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
2 New section 175A inserted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
(d) the Islamabad Capital Territory and provincial and local land record and
development authorities with respect to record-of-rights including
digitized edition of record-of-rights, periodic record, record of mutations
and report of acquisition of right;
(e) the Islamabad Capital Territory and provincial Excise and Taxation
Departments with respect to information regarding registration of
vehicles, transfer of ownership and other associated record;
(f) All electricity suppliers and gas transmission and distribution companies
with respect to particulars of a consumer, the units consumed and the
amount of bill charged or paid:
Provided that where the connection is shared or is used by a
person other than the owner, the name and CNIC of the owner and the
user shall also be furnished:
Provided further that all electricity suppliers and gas
transmission and distribution companies shall make arrangements by the
1st day of January, 2021 for allowing consumers to update the ratio of
sharing of a connection or the particulars of users, as the case may be;
and
(g) any other agency, authority, institution or organization notified by the
Board.
(2) The Board shall make arrangements for laying the infrastructure for
real-time access to information and database under sub-section (1) and aligning it
with its own database in the manner as may be prescribed.
(3) Until real-time access to information and database is made available
under sub-section (1), such information and data shall be provided periodically in
such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(4) Subject to section 216, all information received under this section shall
be used only for tax purposes and kept confidential.]
1[175AA. Exchange of banking and tax information related to high-risk
persons. — (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being
in force, including but not limited to the Banking Companies Ordinance, 1962 (LVII
of 1962), section 216 of this Ordinance and any regulations made under the State
Bank of Pakistan Act,1956 (XXXIII of 1956), —
Section 175AA inserted by the Finance Act, 2025.
(a) the Board may share information obtained from the tax declarations with
scheduled banks in Pakistan, in respect of persons or classes of persons,
for the purpose of cross-matching with the bank data through the data-based
algorithms, as may be prescribed; and
(b) the Scheduled banks shall provide to the Board the final results where the
banking data is at variance with the algorithms provided under clause (a) of
this sub-section.
(2) All information received under this section shall be used only for tax
and related purposes and kept confidential.]
1[175B. National Database and Registration Authority (NADRA). (1) The
National Database and Registration Authority shall, on its own motion or upon
application by the Board, share its records and any information available or held
by it, with the Board, for broadening of the tax base or carrying out the purposes
of the Ordinance.
(2) The National Database and Registration Authority may —
(i) submit proposals and information to the Board with a view to
broadening the tax base;
(ii) identify in relation to any person, whether a taxpayer or not –
(a) income, receipts, assets, properties, liabilities,
expenditures, or transactions that have escaped
assessment or are under-assessed or have been assessed
at a low rate, or have been subjected to excessive relief or
refund or have been misdeclared or misclassified under a
particular head of income or otherwise;
(b) the value of anything mentioned in sub-clause (a) of clause
(ii), if such value is at variance with the value notified by the
Board or the district authorities, as the case may be, or if no
such value has been notified the true or market value; and
(iii) enter into a memorandum of understanding with the Board for a
secure exchange and utilization of a person's information.
(3) The Board may use and utilize any information communicated to it by
the National Database and Registration Authority and forward such information to
an income tax authority having jurisdiction in relation to the subject matter
regarding the information, who may utilize the information for the purposes of the
Ordinance.
New section 175B inserted through Finance Act, 2022.
(4) The National Database and Registration Authority may compute
indicative income and tax liability of anyone mentioned under sub-sections (1) or
(2) by use of artificial intelligence, mathematical or statistical modeling or any other
modern device or calculation method.
(5) The indicative income and tax liability computed by the National
Database and Registration Authority under sub-section (4) shall be notified by the
Board to the person in respect of whom such indicative income and tax liability has
been determined, who shall have the option to pay the determined amount on such
terms, conditions, installments, discounts, reprieves pertaining to penalty and
default surcharge, and time limits that may be prescribed by the Board.
(6) In case the person against whom a liability has been determined
under sub-section (4), does not pay such liability within the time prescribed under
sub-section (5), the Board shall take action under the Ordinance, upon the basis
of tax liability computed under sub-section (4).
(7) If the person against whom the liability has been determined under
sub-section (4) pays such liability in terms of sub-section (5), such payment shall
be construed to be an amended assessment order under section 120 or sub-
section (1) of section 122 or sub-section (4) of section 122, as the case may be.
(8) For the purposes of sub-sections (4) and (5), the Board may prescribe
the extent of installments, reprieves pertaining to penalty and default surcharge
and time limits.]
1[175C. Posting of officer of Inland Revenue. — Subject to such conditions and
restrictions, as deemed fit to be imposed, the Board or the Chief Commissioner
may post an officer of Inland Revenue or such other officials with any designation
working under the control of the Board or the Chief Commissioner, to the business
premises of any person or class of such persons, to monitor production, supply of
goods or rendering of services and the stock of goods not sold at any time for
determining tax payable under this Ordinance.]
176. Notice to obtain information or evidence.— (1) The Commissioner may,
by notice in writing, require any person, whether or not liable for tax under this
Ordinance –
2[(a) to furnish to the Commissioner or an authorised officer, any information
relevant to any tax leviable under this Ordinance or to fulfill any
Section 175C inserted by the Finance Act, 2025.
Substituted by the Finance Act, 2015. The substituted clause (a) read as follows:-
“(a) to furnish to the Commissioner or an authorised officer, any information relevant to any
tax 2[leviable] under this Ordinance as specified in the notice; or”
obligation under any agreement with foreign government or
governments or tax jurisdiction, as specified in the notice; or; and]
(b) to attend at the time and place designated in the notice for the purpose
of being examined on oath by the Commissioner or an authorised
officer concerning the tax affairs of that person or any other person
and, for that purpose, the Commissioner or authorised officer may
require the person examined to produce any accounts, documents, or
computer-stored information in the control of the person 1[; “or”]
2[(c) the firm of chartered accountants 3[ 4[ ] or a firm of cost and
management accountants as defined under the Cost and
Management Accountants Act, 1966 (XIV of 1966)], as appointed by
the 5[Board or the Commissioner], to conduct audit under section 177,
for any tax year, may with the prior approval of the Commissioner
concerned, enter the business premises of a taxpayer, 6[ ] to obtain
any information, require production of any record, on which the
required information is stored and examine it within such premises;
and such firm may if specifically delegated by the Commissioner, also
exercise the powers as provided in sub-section (4).]
7[(1A) A special audit panel appointed under sub-section (11)of section 177,
for any tax year, may, with the prior approval of the Commissioner concerned,
enter the business premises of a taxpayer, to obtain any information, require
production of any record, on which the required information is stored and examine
it within such premises and such panel may if specifically delegated by the
Commissioner, also exercise the powers as provided in subsection(4).]
(2) The Commissioner may impound any accounts or documents
produced under sub-section (1) and retain them for so long as may be necessary
for examination or for the purposes of prosecution.
(3) 8[The person from whom information is required, may at his option,
furnish the same electronically in any computer readable media.] Where a hard
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2009.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2009.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2017.
Comma omitted by the Finance Act, 2022.
The word “Board” substituted by the Finance Act, 2010. The substituted provision has been made
effective from 05.06.2010 by sub-clause (77) of clause 8 of the Finance Act, 2010. Earlier the
substitution was made through Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2009 which was re-promulgated
as Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2010 and remained effective till 05.06.2010.
The words and comma “selected for audit,” omitted by the Finance Act, 2012.
Added by the Finance Act, 2015.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2005.
copy or computer disk of information stored on a computer is not made available
as required under sub-section (1), the Commissioner may require production of
the computer on which the information is stored, and impound and retain the
computer for as long as is necessary to copy the information required.
(4) For the purposes of this section, the Commissioner shall have the
same powers as are vested in a Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
(Act V of 1908), in respect of the following matters, namely: —
(a) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining the
person on oath or affirmation;
(b) compelling the production of any accounts, records, computer-
stored information, or computer;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit; or
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses.
(5) This section shall have effect notwithstanding any 1[law or rules]
relating to privilege or the public interest in relation to the production of accounts,
documents, or computer-stored information or the giving of information.
The words “rule of law” substituted by the Finance Act, 2011.
1[177. Audit.— 2[(1) The Commissioner may call for any record or documents including
books of accounts maintained under this Ordinance or any there law for the time being
in force for conducting audit of the income tax affairs of the person and where such
record or documents have been kept on electronic data, the person shall allow access
to the Commissioner or the officer authorized by the Commissioner for use of machine
and software on which such data is kept and the Commissioner or the officer may have
access to the required information and data and duly attested hard copies of such
information or data for the purpose of investigation and proceedings under this
Ordinance in respect of such person or any other person:
Provided that—
(a) the Commissioner may, after recording reasons in writing
call for record or documents including books of accounts
of the taxpayer; and
Section 177 substituted by the Finance Act, 2004. The Substituted section 177 read as follows:-
“177. Audit:- (1) The commissioner may select any person for an audit of the person’s income tax
affairs having regard to-
(a) the person’s history of compliance or non-compliance with this Ordinance;
(b) the amount of tax payable by the person;
(c) the class of business conducted by the person; and
(d) any other matter that the commissioner considers relevant.
(1A) After selection of a person for audit under sub-section (1), the Commissioner shall conduct an audit of
the income tax affairs (including examination of accounts and records, enquiry into expenditure, assets and
liabilities) of that person.
(1B) After completion of the audit under sub-section (1A) or sub-section (3), the Commissioner may, if
considered necessary, after obtaining taxpayer’s explanation on all the issues raised in the audit, amend the
assessment under sub-section (1) or sub-section (4) of section 122, as the case may be.
(2) The fact that a person has been audited in a year shall not preclude the person from being
audited again in the next and following years where there are reasonable grounds for such audits,
particularly having regard to the factors in sub-section (1).
(3) The Central Board of Revenue may appoint a firm of Chartered Accountants as defined under
the Chartered Accountants Ordinance, 1961(X of 1961), to conduct an audit of the income tax affairs
of any person and the scope of such audit shall be as determined by the Central Board of Revenue on
a case by case basis.
(4) Any person employed by a firm referred to in sub-section (3) may by authorised by the
commissioner, in writing, to exercise the powers in sections 175 and 176 for the purposes of the
conducting audit under that subsection.”
Sub-section (1) substituted by the Finance Act, 2010. The substituted sub-section (1) read as follows:
“(1) The Commissioner may call for any record or documents including books of accounts
maintained under this Ordinance or any other law for the time being in force for conducting audit of
the income tax affairs of the person and where such record or documents have been kept on
electronic data, the person shall allow access to the Commissioner or the officer authorized by the
Commissioner for use of machine and software on which such data is kept and the Commissioner
or the officer may take into possession such machine and duly attested hard copies of such
information or data for the purpose of investigation and proceedings under this Ordinance in respect
of such person or any other person:
Provided that the Commissioner shall not call for record or documents of the taxpayer
after expiry of six years from the end of the tax year to which they relate.”
(b) the reasons shall be communicated to the taxpayer while
calling record or documents including books of accounts
of the taxpayer:
Provided further that the Commissioner shall not call for record or
documents of the taxpayer after expiry of six years from the end of the tax
year to which they relate.]
1[(2) After obtaining the record of a person under sub-section (1) or where
necessary record is not maintained, the Commissioner shall conduct an audit of
the income tax affairs (including examination of accounts and records, enquiry into
expenditure, assets and liabilities) of that person or any other person and may call
for such other information and documents as he may deem appropriate.]
2[(2A) For the purpose of sub-section (2), the Commissioner may conduct
audit proceedings electronically through video links, or any other facility as
prescribed by the Board.
(2AA) Where a taxpayer—
(a) has not furnished record or documents including books of
accounts;
(b) has furnished incomplete record or books of accounts; or
(c) is unable provide sufficient explanation regarding the defects in
records, documents or books of accounts,
it shall be construed that taxable income has not been correctly declared and the
Commissioner shall determine taxable income on the basis of sectoral benchmark
ratios prescribed by the Board.
Explanation.—The expression “sectoral benchmark ratios” means standard
business sector ratios notified by the Board on the basis of comparative cases and
includes financial ratios, production ratios, gross profit ratio, not profit ratio,
recovery ratio, wastage ratio and such other ratios in respect of such sectors as
may be prescribed.]
Sub-section (2) substituted by the Finance Act, 2010. The substituted sub-section (2) read as follows:
“(2) After obtaining the record of a person under sub-section (1) or where necessary record
is not maintained, the Commissioner shall conduct an audit of the income tax affairs (including
examination of accounts and records, enquiry into expenditure, assets and liabilities) of that person
or any other person and may call for such other information and documents as he may deem
appropriate.”
2 New sub-sections (2A) and (2AA) inserted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
1[ ]
2[ ]
3[ ]
4[(6) After compilation of the audit, the Commissioner shall, after obtaining
taxpayer’s explanation on all the issues raised in the audit, issue an audit report
containing audit observations and finding.]
5[(6A) After issuing the audit report, the Commissioner may, if considered
necessary, amend the assessment under sub-section (1) or sub-section (4) of
section 122, as the case may be, after providing an opportunity of being heard to
the taxpayer under sub-section (9) of section 122.]
(7) The fact that a person has been audited in a year shall not preclude
the person from being audited again in the next and following years where there
are reasonable grounds for such audits 6[ ].
(8) The 7[Board] may appoint a firm of Chartered Accountants as defined
under the Chartered Accountants Ordinance, 1961 (X of 1961) 8[or a firm of Cost
and Management Accountants as defined under the Cost and Management
Accountants Act, 1966 (XIV of 1966)], or a firm of Cost and Management
Accountants as defined under the Cost and Management Accountants Act, 1966
Sub-section (3) omitted by the Finance Act, 2010. The omitted sub-section (3) read as follows:
“(3) The Board shall keep the criteria confidential.”
Sub-section (4) omitted by the Finance Act, 2010. The omitted sub-section (4) read as follows:
“(4) In addition to the selection referred to in sub-section (2), the Commissioner may also select
a person or classes of persons for an audit of the person’s income tax affairs having regard to -
(a) the person’s history of compliance or non-compliance with this Ordinance;
(b) the amount of tax payable by the person;
(c) the class of business conducted by the person; and
(d) any other matter which in the opinion of Commissioner is material for
determination of correct income.”
Sub-section (5) omitted by the Finance Act, 2010. The omitted sub-section (5) read as follows:
“(5) After selection of a person or classes of persons for audit under sub-section (2) or (4),
the Commissioner shall conduct an audit of the income tax affairs (including examination of accounts
and records, enquiry into expenditure, assets and liabilities) of such person or classes of persons.”
Sub-section (6) substituted through Finance Act, 2019 substituted sub-section (6) read as follows:
(6) After completion of the audit 4[ ], the Commissioner may, if considered necessary, after obtaining
taxpayer’s explanation on all the issues raised in the audit, amend the assessment under sub-section
(1) or sub-section (4) of section 122, as the case may be.
New sub-section (6A) inserted through Finance Act, 2019.
The words, comma, brackets and figure “particularly having regard to the factors in sub-section (4)“
omitted by the Finance Act, 2010.
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2010.
(XIV of 1966) to conduct an audit of the income tax affairs of any person 1[or
classes of persons 2[ ] ] and the scope of such audit shall be as determined by the
3[Board] 4[or the Commissioner] on a case to case basis.
(9) Any person employed by a firm referred to in sub-section (8) may be
authorized by the Commissioner, in writing, to exercise the powers in sections 175
and 176 for the purposes of conducting an audit under that sub-section.]
5[(10) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (2) and (6) where
a person fails to produce before the Commissioner or a firm of Chartered
Accountants or a firm of Cost and Management Accountants appointed by the
Board or the Commissioner under sub-section (8) to conduct an audit, any
accounts, documents and records, required to be maintained under section 174
or any other relevant document, electronically kept record, electronic machine or
any other evidence that may be required by the Commissioner or the firm of
Chartered Accountants or the firm of Cost and Management Accountants for the
purpose of audit or determination of income and tax due thereon, the
Commissioner may proceed to make best judgment assessment under section
121 of this Ordinance and the assessment treated to have been made on the
basis of return or revised return filed by the taxpayer shall be of no legal effect.]
6[Explanation.— For the removal of doubt, it is declared that the
powers of the Commissioner under this section are independent of the
powers of the Board under section 214C and nothing contained in
section 214C restricts the powers of the Commissioner to call for the
record or documents including books of accounts of a taxpayer for
audit and to conduct audit under this section.]
7[(11) The Board may appoint as many special audit panels as may be
necessary, comprising two or more members from the following:—
(a) an officer or officers of Inland Revenue;
(b) a firm of chartered accountants as defined under the Chartered
Accountants Ordinance, 1961 (X of 1961);
(c) a firm of cost and management accountants as defined under the Cost
and Management Accountants Act, 1966 (XIV of 1966); or
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2009.
The words “selected for audit by the Commissioner or by the Board” omitted by the Finance Act, 2010.
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2010.
Added by the Finance Act, 2010.
Added by the Finance Act, 2013.
Added by Finance Act, 2015.
(d) any other person 1[including a foreign expert or specialist] as directed
by the Board, to conduct an audit, including a forensic audit, of the
income tax affairs of any person or classes of persons and the scope
of such audit shall be as determined by the Board or the
Commissioner on case-to-case basis.
2[(e) a tax audit expert deployed under an audit assistance programme of
an international tax organization or a tax authority outside Pakistan:
Provided that in case the member is not an officer of Inland
Revenue, the person shall only be included as a member in the special
audit panel if an agreement of confidentiality has been entered into
between the Board and the person, international tax organization or a
tax authority, as the case may be.]
(12) Special audit panel under sub-section (1) shall be headed by a
Chairman who shall be an officer of Inland Revenue.
(13) Powers under sections 175 and 176 for the purposes of conducting
an audit under sub-section (11), shall only be exercised by an officer or officers of
Inland Revenue, who are member or members of the special audit panel, and
authorized by the Commissioner.
(14) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (2) and(6), where
a person fails to produce before the Commissioner or a special audit panel under
sub-section (11) to conduct an audit, any accounts, documents and records,
required to be maintained under section 174 or any other relevant document,
electronically kept record, electronic machine or any other evidence that may be
required by the Commissioner or the panel, the Commissioner may proceed to
make best judgment assessment under section 121 and the assessment treated
to have been made on the basis of return or revised return filed by the taxpayer
shall be of no legal effect.
(15) If any one member of the special audit panel, other than the Chairman,
is absent from conducting an audit, the proceedings of the audit may continue, and
the audit conducted by the special audit panel shall not be invalid or be called in
question merely on the ground of such absence.
(16) Functions performed by an officer or officers of Inland Revenue as
members of the special audit panel, for conducting audit, shall be treated to have
been performed by special audit panel.
(17) The Board may prescribe the mode and manner of constitution,
procedure and working of the special audit panel.”]
Inserted by Finance Act, 2018
Added by Finance Act, 2018
178. Assistance to Commissioner.— Every Officer of Customs, 1[ ] Provincial
Excise and Taxation, District Coordination Officer, District Officers including
District Officer – Revenue, the Police and the Civil Armed Forces is empowered
and required to assist the Commissioner in the discharge of the Commissioner’s
functions under this Ordinance.
179. Accounts, documents, records and computer-stored information not
in Urdu or English language.— Where any account, document, record or
computer-stored information referred to in section 174, 175 or 176 is not in the
Urdu or English language, the Commissioner may, by notice in writing, require the
person keeping the account, document, record or computer-stored information to
provide, at the person's expense, a translation into the Urdu or English language
by a translator approved by the Commissioner for this purpose.
180. Power to collect information regarding exempt income.— The 2[Board]
may, by notification in the official Gazette, authorise any department or agency of
the Government to collect and compile any data in respect of incomes from
industrial and commercial undertakings exempt from tax under this Ordinance.
The words and commas “Federal Excise, Sales Tax,” omitted by the Finance Act, 2013.
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
1[PART IX
TAXPAYER’S REGISTRATION
181. Taxpayer’s registration.— (1) Every taxpayer 2[including a person selling
digitally ordered goods or services from within Pakistan using online marketplace
or a courier service, as the case may be,] shall apply in the prescribed form and in
the prescribed manner for registration.
3[(1A) Every online marketplace or courier service, involved in e-commerce
by supplying or delivering digitally ordered goods or services from within Pakistan,
shall not allow any vendor to use its platform services to carry out e-commerce
transactions unless such vendors have been registered under this Ordinance.]
(2) The Commissioner having jurisdiction over a case, where
necessitated by the facts of the case, may also register a taxpayer in the prescribed
manner.
(3) Taxpayers’ registration scheme shall be regulated through the rules
to be notified by the Board 4[ 5[“.”] ] ]
6[ 7[ ] ]
8[(4) From tax year 2015 and onwards, in case of individuals having
Computerized National Identity Card (CNIC) issued by the National Database and
Registration Authority, CNIC shall be used as National Tax Number.]
Part IX ssubstituted by the Finance Act, 2008. The substituted “Part IX” read as follows:
“PART IX
NATIONAL TAX NUMBER CERTIFICATE
181. National Tax Number Certificate.- (1) Every taxpayer shall apply in the prescribed form and
in the prescribed manner for a National Tax Number Certificate.
(2) An application under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by the prescribed fee.
(3) The Commissioner having jurisdiction over an applicant under sub-section (1) may after
examination of all relevant documents and evidence, and after satisfying himself of the genuineness
of the application, may direct issuance of the National Tax Number Certificate for a period prescribed
by Commissioner:
Provided that the Board may in the case of individuals allow use of National Identity Card,
issued by the National Database and Registration Authority, in place of National Tax Number.”
Expression inserted by the Finance Act, 2025.
Section (1A) inserted by the Finance Act, 2025.
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2013.
Substituted “:” by the Finance Act, 2015.
Added by the Finance Act, 2013.
Omitted by the Finance Act, 2015. The omitted proviso read as follows:-
“Provided that the Board may in case of individuals allow, in place of National Tax
Number, use of Computerized National Identity Card issued by the National Database and
Registration Authority.”
Added by the Finance Act, 2015.
1[181A. Active taxpayers’ list.— (1) The Board shall have the power to institute
active taxpayers’ list.
(2) Active taxpayers’ list shall be regulated as may be prescribed.]
2[181AA. Compulsory registration in certain cases.-(1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in any law, for the time being in force, any application for
commercial or industrial connection of electricity or natural gas, shall not be
processed and such connection shall not be provided unless the person applying
for electricity or gas connection is registered under section 181.]
3[181B. Taxpayer card.— Subject to this Ordinance, the Board may make a
scheme for introduction of a tax-payer honour card for individual taxpayers, who
fulfill a minimum criteria to be eligible for the benefits as contained in the scheme.]
4[181C. Displaying of National Tax Number.— Every person deriving income
from business chargeable to tax, who has been issued a National Tax Number,
shall display his National Tax Number at a conspicuous place at every place of his
business.]
5[181D. Business licence scheme.- 6[(1)] Every person engaged in any business,
profession or vocation shall be required to obtain and display a business licence
as prescribed by the Board.]
7[(2) Where a person fails to obtain business licence under sub-section (1),
the Commissioner may, in addition to and not in derogation of any punishment to
which the person may be liable under this Ordinance or any other law, impose a
fine of –
(a) twenty thousand Rupees, in case of a taxpayer deriving income
chargeable to tax under this Ordinance; or
(b) five thousand Rupees, in all other cases.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2010.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2014.
Added by the Finance Act, 2012.
Added by the Finance Act, 2013.
New Section (181D) inserted through Finance Act, 2019.
6 Provision re-numbered as sub-section (1) through Tax Law (Second Amendment) 2019 dated 26th
December, 2019
7 New sub-sections (2) & (3) inserted through Tax Law (Second Amendment) 2019, dated 26th
December, 2019
(3) The Commissioner may, by an order in writing, cancel a business
licence issued under sub-section (1) after providing an opportunity of being
heard to the person, if –
(a) such person fails to notify any change in particulars within thirty days of
such charge; or
(b) such person is convicted of any offence under any federal tax law.]
1[181E. Record of beneficial owners.- (1) Every company and association of
persons shall electronically furnish particulars of its beneficial owners in such
form and manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Every company and association of persons shall update the particulars of its
beneficial owners as and when there is a change in the particulars of the
beneficial owners.]
1 New Section 181E inserted by the Finance Act, 2022.
