PART II
OIL, NATURAL GAS AND OTHER MINERAL DEPOSITS
100. Special provisions relating to the production of oil and natural gas, and
exploration and extraction of other mineral deposits.—(1) Subject to sub-
section (2), the profits and gains from —
(a) the exploration and production of petroleum including natural
gas and from refineries set up at the Dhodak and Bobi fields;
(b) the pipeline operations of exploration and production
companies; or
(c) the manufacture and sale of liquefied petroleum gas or
compressed natural gas,
and the tax payable thereon shall be computed in accordance with the rules in Part
I of the Fifth Schedule.
(2) Sub-section (1) shall not apply to the profits and gains attributable to
the production of petroleum including natural gas discovered before the 24th day
of September, 19541[:]
2[Provided that the for tax year 2017 and onward the provisions of this
sub-section shall not apply on profit and gains derived from sui gas field.]
(3) The profits and gains of any business which consists of, or includes,
the exploration and extraction of such mineral deposits of a wasting nature (not
being petroleum or natural gas) as may be specified in this behalf by the 3[Board
with the approval of the Minister-in-charge] carried on by a person in Pakistan shall
be computed in accordance with the rules in Part II of the Fifth Schedule.
4[100A. Special provisions relating to banking business.—(1) Subject to sub-
section (2), the income, profits and gains of any banking company as defined in
clause (7) of section 2 and tax payable thereon shall be computed in accordance
with the rules in the Seventh Schedule.
(2) Sub-section (1) shall apply to the profits and gains of the banking
companies relevant to tax year 2009 and onwards.
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act 2017.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2017.
The words “Federal Government” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2007.
1[(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), income, profits
and gains and tax payable thereon shall be computed subject to the limitations
and provisions contained in Chapters VII and VIII.]
2[100B. Special provision relating to capital gain tax.— (1) Capital gains on
disposal of listed securities and tax thereon 3[including super tax under section 4C
], subject to section 37A, shall be computed, determined, collected and deposited
in accordance with the rules laid down in the Eighth Schedule.
(2) The provisions of sub–section (1) shall not apply to the following
persons or class of persons, namely:-
(a) a mutual fund;
(b) banking company, a non-banking finance company and an
insurance company subject to tax under the Fourth Schedule;
(c) a modaraba;
4[(d) a company, in respect of debt securities only; and]
(e) any other person or class of persons notified by the Board.]
5[100BA. Special provisions relating to persons not appearing in active
taxpayers’ list.-(1) The collection or deduction of advance income tax,
computation of income and tax payable thereon 6[in respect of a person not
appearing on the active taxpayers’ list] 7[or persons appearing on the active
taxpayers’ list who have not filed return by the due date specified in section 118
or by the due date as extended under section 119 or 214A] shall be determined
in accordance with the rules in the Tenth Schedule.
(2) The provisions of the Tenth Schedule shall have effect
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Ordinance.]
Added by the Finance Act, 2018.
Added by the Finance Act, 2012.
3 Words inserted by the Finance Act, 2023.
Clause (d) substituted by new clause (d) by the Finance Act, 2014. The substituted clause read as
follows:
“(d) “a foreign institutional investor” being a person registered with NCCPL as a foreign
institutional investor; and”
New section 100BA inserted through Finance Act, 2019.
6 Words inserted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020.
Expression inserted by the Finance Act, 2024.
1[ ]
2[100C. Tax credit for charitable organizations.— (1) The persons mentioned in
sub-section (2) shall be allowed a tax credit equal to one hundred percent of tax
payable under any of the provisions of this Ordinance including minimum and final
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2014.
Section 100C substituted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier this substitution was made through Tax
Laws (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 2021. The substituted section read as follows:
“100C. Tax credit for certain persons.- (1) 2[The income of]Non-profit organizations, trusts or welfare
institutions, as mentioned in sub-section (2) shall be allowed a tax credit equal to one hundred per cent
of the tax payable, including minimum tax and final taxes payable under any of the provisions of this
Ordinance, subject to the following conditions, namely:-
(a) return has been filed;
(b) tax required to be deducted or collected has been deducted or collected and paid;2[ ]
(c) withholding tax statements for the immediately preceding tax year have been filed2[;]
2[(d) the administrative and management expenditure does not exceed 15% of the total receipts:
“Provided that clause (d) shall not apply to a non-profit organization, if—
2[(i) charitable and welfare activities of the non-profit organization have commenced for
the first time within last three years; and
(ii)] total receipts of the non-profit organization during the tax year are less than one
hundred million Rupees” 2[;]
2[(e) approval of Commissioner has been obtained as per the requirement of clause (36) of
section 2:
Provided that this clause shall take effect from the first day of July, 2020; 2[ ]
(f) none of the assets of trusts or welfare institutions confers, or may confer, a private benefit
to the donors or family, children or author of the trust or his descendents or the maker of
the institution or to any other person:
Provided that where such private benefit is conferred, the amount of such benefit shall be
added to the income of the donor 2[; and]
(g) a statement of voluntary contributions and donations received in the immediately preceding
tax year has been filed in the prescribed from and manner.]
2[(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), surplus funds of non-profit
2[organizations, trusts or welfare institutions] shall be taxed at a rate of ten percent.
(1B) For the purpose of sub-section (1A), surplus funds mean funds or monies:
(a) not spent on charitable and welfare activities during the tax year;
(b) received during the tax year as donations, voluntary contributions, subscriptions and
other incomes;
(c) which are more than twenty-five percent of the total receipts of the non-profit
organization received during the tax year; and
(d) are not part of restricted funds.
Explanation.- For the purpose of this sub-section, “restricted funds” mean any
fund received by the organization but could not be spent and treated as revenue during
the year due to any obligation placed by the donor.]
(2) Persons 2[and incomes] eligible for tax credit under this section include-
(a) any income of a trust or welfare institution or non-profit organization from donations,
voluntary contributions, subscriptions, house property, investments in the securities of
the Federal Government and so much of the income chargeable under the head
"income from business" as is expended in Pakistan for the purposes of carrying out
welfare activities:
Provided that in the case of income under the head "income from business", the
exemption in respect of income under the said head shall not exceed an amount which
bears to the income, under the said head, the same proportion as the said amount
bears to the aggregate of the incomes from the aforesaid sources of income.
taxes in respect of incomes mentioned in sub-section (3) subject to the conditions
and limitations laid down in subsection (4).
(2) The provisions of this section shall apply to the following persons,
namely:—
(a) persons specified in 1[ ] clause (66) of Part I of the Second Schedule to
this Ordinance;
(b) a trust administered under a scheme approved by the Federal
Government and established in Pakistan exclusively for the purposes of
(b) a trust administered under a scheme approved by the Federal Government in this
behalf and established in Pakistan exclusively for the purposes of carrying out such
activities as are for the benefit and welfare of—
(i) ex-servicemen and serving personnel, including civilian employees of the
Armed Forces, and their dependents; or
(ii) ex-employees and serving personnel of the Federal Government or a Provincial
Government and their dependents, where the said trust is administered by a
committee nominated by the Federal Government or, as the case may be, a
Provincial Government;
(c) 2[ ]
(d) income of a university or other educational institution being run by a non-profit
organization existing solely for educational purposes and not for purposes of profit;
(e) any income which is derived from investments in securities of the Federal
Government, profit on debt from scheduled banks 2[and microfinance banks], grant
received from Federal Government or Provincial Government or District Governments,
foreign grants and house property held under trust or other legal obligations wholly,
or in part only, for religious or charitable purposes and is actually applied or finally set
apart for application thereto:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to so much of the income as is
not expended within Pakistan:
Provided further that if any sum out of the amount so set apart is expended
outside Pakistan, it shall be included in the total income of the tax year in which it is
so expended or of the year in which it was set apart, whichever is the greater, and the
provisions of section 122 shall not apply to any assessment made or to be made in
pursuance of this proviso.
Explanation.— Notwithstanding anything contained in the Mussalman Wakf
Validating Act, 1913 (VI of 1913), or any other law for the time being in force or in the
instrument relating to the trust or the institution, if any amount is set apart, expended
or disbursed for the maintenance and support wholly or partially of the family, children
or descendants of the author of the trust or the donor or, the maker of the institution
or for his own maintenance and support during his life time or payment to himself or
his family, children, relations or descendants or for the payment of his or their debts
out of the income from house property dedicated, or if any expenditure is made other
than for charitable purposes, in each case such expenditure, provision, setting apart,
payment or disbursement shall not be deemed, for the purposes of this clause, to be
for religious or charitable purposes; or
(f) any income of a religious or charitable institution derived from voluntary contributions
applicable solely to religious or charitable purposes of the institution:
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply to the income of a private
religious trust which does not ensure for the benefit of the public.”;]
The expression “Table - II of” omitted by the Finance Act, 2025.
carrying out such activities as are for the welfare of ex-employees and
serving personnel of the Federal Government or a Provincial
Government or armed forces including civilian employees of armed
forces and their dependents where the said trust is administered by a
committee nominated by the Federal Government or a Provincial
Government;
(c) a trust;
(d) a welfare institution registered with Provincial or Islamabad Capital
Territory (ICT) social welfare department;
(e) a not for profit company registered with the Securities and Exchange
Commission of Pakistan under section 42 of the Companies Act, 2017;
(f) a welfare society registered under the provincial or Islamabad Capital
Territory (ICT) laws related to registration of co-operative societies;
(g) a waqf registered under Mussalman Waqf Validating Act, 1913 (VI of
1913) or any other law for the time being in force or in the instrument
relating to the trust or the institution;
(h) a university or education institutions being run by nonprofit organization
existing solely for educational purposes and not for the purposes of
profit;
(i) a religious or charitable institution for the benefit of public registered
under any law for the time being in force; and
(j) international non-governmental organizations (INGOs) approved by the
Federal Government.
(3) The following income is eligible for tax credit, namely:—
(a) income from donations, voluntary contributions and subscriptions;
(b) income from house property;
(c) income from investments in the securities of the Federal Government;
(d) profit on debt from scheduled banks and microfinance banks;
(e) grant received from Federal, Provincial, Local or foreign Government;
(f) so much of the income chargeable under the head “income from
business” as is expended in Pakistan for the purposes of carrying out
welfare activities:
Provided that in the case of income under the head “income from
business”, only so much of such income shall be eligible for tax credit
under this section that bears the same proportion as the said amount of
business income bears to the aggregate of income from all sources; and
(g) any income of the persons mentioned in clauses (a), (b) and (h) of sub-
section (2) of this section.
(4) Eligibility for tax credit shall be subject to the following conditions,
namely:—
(a) return has been filed;
(b) tax required to be deducted or collected has been deducted or collected
and paid;
(c) withholding tax statements for the relevant tax year have been filed;
(d) the administrative and management expenditure does not exceed 15%
of the total receipts:
Provided that clause (d) shall not apply to a nonprofit organization, if—
(i) charitable and welfare activities of the non-profit organization have
commenced for the first time within last three years; or
(ii) total receipts of the non-profit organization during the tax year are less
than one hundred million Rupees;
(e) approval of Commissioner has been obtained as per requirement of
clause (36) of section 2:
Provided that the condition of approval in respect of persons
mentioned in 1[ ] clause (66) of Part I of the Second Schedule to this
Ordinance, shall take effect from the first day of July, 2[2023] and the
requirements of clause (36) of section 2, shall not be applicable for
earlier years;
The expression “Table - II of” omitted by the Finance Act, 2025.
The figure 2022 substituted by the Finance Act, 2022.
(f) none of the assets of trusts or welfare institutions confers, or may confer,
a private benefit to the donors or family, children or author of the trust or
his descendants or the maker of the institution or to any other person:
Provided that where such private benefit is conferred, the amount
of such benefit shall be added to the income of the donor; and
(g) a statement of voluntary contributions and donations received in the
immediately preceding tax year has been filed in the prescribed form
and manner.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), surplus funds of
organizations to which this section applies shall be taxed at a rate of ten percent.
(6) For the purpose of sub-section (5), surplus funds mean funds or
monies—
(a) not spent on charitable and welfare activities during the tax year;
(b) received during the tax year as donations, voluntary contributions,
subscriptions and other incomes;
(c) which are more than twenty-five percent of the total receipts of the non-
profit organization received during the tax year; and
(d) are not part of restricted funds.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this clause, “restricted funds” mean
any fund received by the organization but could not be spent and treated
as revenue during the year due to any obligation placed by the donor or
funds received in kind.]
1[100D. Special provisions relating to builders and developers. – (1) For tax
year 2020 and onwards, the tax payable by a builder or a developer, as defined in
sub-section (9), who opt to pay tax under this section shall be computed and paid
in accordance with the rules in the Eleventh Schedule on a project by project basis
1 New section (100D) inserted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
on the income, profits and gains derived from the sale of buildings or sale of plots,
as the case may be, from –
(a) a new project to be completed by the 1[30th day of September, 2023]; or
(b) an incomplete existing project to be completed by the 2[30th day of
September, 2023]:
Provided that any income, profits and gains of a builder or developer
of an incomplete existing project earned up to tax year 2019 3[or tax year
2020, as the case may be] shall be subject to the provisions of this
Ordinance as were in force prior to the commencement of the Tax Laws
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2020 (Ordinance I of 2020):
Provided further that any income of a builders or developer other than
income, profits and gains subject to this section shall be subject to tax as
per the provisions of this Ordinance.
(2) Where sub-section (1) applies,-
(a) the income shall not be chargeable to tax under any head of income in
computing the taxable income of the person;
(b) no deduction shall be allowed under this Ordinance for any expenditure
incurred in deriving the income:
(c) the amount of the income shall not be reduced by –
(i) any deductible allowance under Part IX of Chapter III: or
(ii) the set off of any loss;
(d) no tax credit shall be allowed against the tax payable under sub-section
(1) except credit for tax under section 236A or 236K collected from the
builder or developer after the commencement of the Tax Law
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2020 (1 of 2020) on purchase of immoveable
property utilized in a project;
1 The expression “30th day of September, 2022” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier the
substitution was made through Income Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
2 The expression “30th day of September, 2022” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier the
substitution was made through Income Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
This expression inserted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier this expression was made through Income
Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
(e) there shall be no refund of any tax collected or deducted under this
Ordinance;
(f) if the tax payable has not been paid or short paid, the said amount of tax
may be recovered and all the provisions of this Ordinance shall apply
accordingly; and
(g) section 113 and 113C shall not apply on the turnover, income, profits and
gains of a builder or developer from a project.
(3) The provisions of section 111 shall not apply to capital investment made
in a new project under clause (a) of sub-section (1) in the form of money or land,
subject to the following conditions, namely:-
(a) if the investment is made by a builder or developer being an individual-
(i) in the form of money, such builder or developer shall open a new
bank account and deposit such amount in it on or before the 1[30th
day of June, 2021]; or
(ii) in the form of land, such builder or developer shall have the
ownership title of the land at the time of commencement of the Tax
Laws (Amendment) Ordinance, 2020 (I of 2020);
(b) if the investment is made by a person in a project through a company
or an association of persons,-
(i) such company or association of person shall be a single object
(builder or developer) company or association of persons registered
under the Companies Act, 2017 (XIX of 2017), the Limited Liability
Partnership Act, 2017 (XV of 2017) or the Partnership Act 1932 (IX
of 1932), as the case may be, after the date of commencement of
the Tax Laws (Amendment) Ordinance, 2020 (I of 2020) and on or
before the 2[30th day of June, 2021]; and
(ii) the person shall be a member or shareholder of such association of
persons or company, as the case may be;
and if the capital investment is made,-
1 The expression “31st day of December, 2020” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier the
substitution was made through Income Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
2 The expression “31st day of December, 2020” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier the
substitution was made through Income Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
(i) in the form of money, such amount shall be invested through a
crossed banking instrument deposited in the bank account of
such association of persons or company, as the case may be,
no or before the 1[30th day of June, 2021]; or
(ii) in the form of land, such land shall be transferred to such
association of persons or company, as the case may be, on or
before the 2[30th day of June, 2021]:
Provided that the person shall have the ownership title of the
land at the time of commencement of the Tax Laws
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2020 (I of 2020)
(c) a person making an investment under clause (a) or (b) shall submit a
prescribed form on Iris web portal 3[by 30th day of June, 2021];
(d) the money or land invested under clause (a) or (b) shall be wholly utilized
in a project; and
(e) completion of the project shall be certified in the following manner,
namely:-
(i) in case of a builder, the map approving authority or NESPAK
shall certify that grey structure as per the approved map has
been completed by the builder on or before the 4[30th day of
September, 2023]; and
(ii) in case of a develop,-
(A) the map approving authority or NESPAK shall certify that
landscaping has been completed on or before the 5[30th day
of September, 2023];
(B) a firm of chartered accountants having an ICAP QCR rating
of ‘satisfactory’, notified by the Board for this purpose, shall
1 The expression “31st day of December, 2020” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier the
substitution was made through Income Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
2 The expression “31st day of December, 2020” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier the
substitution was made through Income Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
The expression inserted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier this insertion was made through Income
Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
4 The expression “30th day of September, 2022” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier the
substitution was made through Income Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
5 The expression “30th day of September, 2022” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier the
substitution was made through Income Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
certify that at least 50% of the plots have been booked for
sale and at least 40% of the sale proceeds have been
received by the 1[30th day of September, 2023]; and
(C) at least 50% of the roads have been laid up to sub-grade
level as certified by the approving authority of NESPAK.
(4) The provisions of section 111 shall also not apply to.-
(a) the first purchaser of a building or a unit of the building purchased from
the builder in respect of purchase price of the building or unit of the
building subject to the following conditions, namely:-
(i) full payment is made through a crossed banking instrument to
the builder during a period starting from the date of registration
of the project with the Board under this section and ending on
the 2[31st day of March, 2023], in case the purchase is from a
new project; and
(ii) full or balance amount of payment is made through a crossed
banking instrument to the builder during a period starting from
the date of registration of the project with the Board under this
section and ending on the 3[31st day of March, 2023], in case
the purchase is from an existing incomplete project; and
(b) the purchaser of a plot who intends to construct a building thereon, if-
(i) the purchase is made on a before the 4[30th day of June, 2021];
(ii) the full payment is made on or before the 5[30th day of June,
2021] through a crossed banking instrument;
(iii) construction on such plot is commenced on or before the 6[31st
day of December, 2021];
1 The expression “30th day of September, 2022” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier the
substitution was made through Income Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
2 The expression “30th day of September, 2022” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier the
substitution was made through Income Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
3 The expression “30th day of September, 2022” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier the
substitution was made through Income Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
4 The expression “31st day of December, 2020” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier the
substitution was made through Income Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021..
5 The expression “31st day of December, 2020” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier the
substitution was made through Income Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
6 The expression “31st day of December, 2020” ” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier the
substitution was made through Income Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
(iv) such construction is completed on or before the 1[30th day of
September, 2023]; and
(v) the person registers himself with the Board on the online Iris
werb portal.
(5) Where sub-section (3) or (4) apply, the value or price of land or
building, as the case may be, shall be the higher of clause (a) or (b) below:-
(a) 130% of the fair market value as determined by the Board under sub-
section (4) of section 68; or
(b) at the option of the person making investment, the lower of the values
as determined by at least two independent valuers from the list of
valuers approved by the State Bank of Pakistan.
(6) Sub-sections (3) and (4) shall not apply to -
(a) holder of any public office as defined in the Voluntary Declaration of
Domestic Assets Act, 2018 or his benamidar as defined in the Benami
Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 2017 (V of 2017) or his spouse or
dependents;
(b) a public listed company, a real estate investment trust or a company
whose income is exempt under any provision of this Ordinance; or
(c) any proceeds derived from the commission of a criminal offence
including the crimes of money laundering extortion or terror financing
but excluding the offences under this Ordinance.
(7) Divided income paid to a person by a builder or developer being a
company out of the profits and gains derived from a project shall be exempt from
tax.
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section or the Eleventh
Schedule, where a return or declaration has been made through misrepresentation
or suppression of facts, such return or declaration shall be void and all the
provisions of this Ordinance shall apply:
Provided that no action under this sub-section shall be taken if such
misrepresentation has been made on account of a bona fide mistake:
1 The expression “30th day of September, 2022” ” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier the
substitution was made through Income Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
Provided further that no action under this sub-section shall be taken
without providing an opportunity of being heard and without prior approval of
the Board.
(9) In this section.-
(a) “builder” means a person who is registered as a builder with the Board
and is engaged in the construction and disposal of residential or
commercial buildings;
(b) “capital investment” means investment as equity resources and does not
include borrowed funds;
(c) “developer” means a person who is registered as a developer with the
Board and is engaged in the development of land in the form of plots of
any kind either for itself or otherwise;
(d) “existing project” means a construction or development project, which-
(i) has commenced before the date of commencement of the Tax Laws
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2020;
(ii) is incomplete;
(iii) is completed on or before the 1[30th day of September, 2023];and
(iv) a declaration is provided in the registration from under Eleventh
Schedule to the effect of percentage of the project completed up to
the last day of the accounting period pertaining to tax year 2019 2[or
tax year 2020 at the option of the taxpayer];
(e) “first purchaser” means a person who purchases a building or a unit, as
the case may be, directly from the builder and does not include a
subsequent or a substituted purchaser;
(f) “new project” means a construction or development project, which-
(i) is commenced during the period starting from the date of
commencement of the Tax Laws (Amendment) Ordinance,
2020 and ending on the 3[31st day of December, 2021]; and
(ii) is competed on or before the 4[30th day of September, 2023];
1 The expression “30th day of September, 2022” ” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier the
substitution was made through Income Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
This expression inserted ” by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier this insertion was made through Income
Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
3 The expression “31st day of December, 2020” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier the
substitution was made through Income Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
4 The expression “30th day of September, 2022” ” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier the
substitution was made through Income Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
(g) “project” means a project for construction of a building with the object of
disposal, or a project for development of land into plots with the object
of disposal or otherwise;
(h) “registered with the Board” means registered after submission of form
on project-by-project basis on the online Iris web portal;
(10) The provisions of the Ordinance not specifically dealt with in this
section or the rules made thereunder shall apply mutatis mutandis to builders and
developers in so far as they are not inconsistent with this section or the rules made
thereunder.]
1[100E. Special provisions relating to small and medium enterprises.— (1)
For tax year 2021 and onwards, the tax payable by a small and medium enterprise
as defined in clause (59A) of section 2 shall be computed and paid in accordance
with rules made under the Fourteenth Schedule.
(2) The Board may prescribe a simplified return for a small and medium
enterprise.]
2[ ]
Section 100E inserted by the Finance Act, 2021.
2 Section 100F shall be omitted and shall be deemed to have been omitted with effect from 02nd March,
2022 by the Finance Act, 2022. The omitted section read as follows:
"100F. Special provisions relating to investment for industrial promotion. — (1) Any eligible
person may file a statement by the 30th September, 2022, declaring therein the amount of funds
(which have not been declared in any of the returns of income upto tax year 2021 filed by the 31st
December, 2021) for investment in a new company formed for establishing and operating an
industrial undertaking in accordance with this section:
Provided that the funds referred to in sub-section (I) shall be deposited in rupees in a
dedicated bank account in Pakistan as equity of the newly formed company, incorporated under the
Companies Act, 2017 (XIX of 2017), before the filing of the statement and such funds shall only be
used for purchase or import of plant and machinery through letter of credit or for construction of
building and structure for the industrial undertaking:
Provided further that the minimum amount which would qualify for the purposes of this
section shall be fifty million rupees.
(2) The provisions of section 111 shall not apply to the funds declared under sub-section (I)
subject to fulfilment of conditions as laid down in this section and payment of an amount equal to five
percent thereof along with the statement filed under sub-section (1).
(3) The new industrial undertaking in which such investment is made shall commence
commercial production by the 30th June, 2024 and a certificate to that effect, duly issued by
Engineering Development Board, is submitted to the Commissioner along with the return filed for tax
year 2024.
(4) Any amount of tax paid under this section shall not be refundable or adjustable against
any other tax liability of the declarant.
(5) Where a declarant has paid tax under this section in respect of funds declared under sub-
section (I), the declarant shall be entitled to incorporate the same in his wealth statement, financial
statements or books of accounts, as the case may be.
(6) For the purposes of this section, eligible person means all persons, except–
(a) holders of' public office, their spouses and dependent children;
(b) a public company as defined in clause (47) of section 2 of this Ordinance;
(c) a person who has filed a declaration under the Voluntary Declaration of Domestic
Assets Act, 2018, the Foreign Assets (Declaration and Repatriation) Act, 2018, or the Assets
Declaration Act, 2019;
(d) a person that has been declared a bank loan defaulter by a bank or a financial institution
within the last three years; or
(e) a director of a company who has been declared a bank loan defaulter by a bank or a financial
institution within the last three years.
(7) The provisions of this section shall not apply to —
(a) any proceeds of crime, corruption, money laundering and terror financing;
(b) any amount which is subject of any departmental or court proceedings;
(c) the investments made in following sectors, namely:—
(i) arms and ammunitions;
(ii) explosives;
(i) sugar;
(ii) cigarettes;
(iii) aerated beverages;
(iv) flour mills;
(v) vegetable ghee; and
(vi) cooking oil manufacturing excluding extraction units.
(8) Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law for the time being in force including sub-
section (3) of section 216 of this Ordinance excluding clauses (a) and (g) of sub-section (3) thereof,
the National Accountability Ordinance, 1999 (XVIII of 1999), the Federal Investigation Agency Act,
1974 (VIII of 1975) and the Right of Access to Information Act, 2017 (XXXI V of 2017), particulars of
any person making a statement under this section or any information received in any statement made
under this section shall be confidential.
(9) The statement filed under sub-section (1) shall not be valid, if—
(a) the newly formed industrial undertaking company fails to prove commercial production in
terms of sub-section (3);
(b) there is change in ownership of industrial undertaking company prior to the 30th June, 2026;
or
(c) the newly formed industrial undertaking company disposes of any of its assets prior to the
30th June, 2026.
(10) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where the provisions of sub-section (7)
or (9) apply, or where the statement under sub-section (I) has been made by misrepresentation or
suppression of facts, such statement shall be void as if it had never been made and all the provisions
of this Ordinance shall apply accordingly:
Provided that the Commissioner shall not take any action under this section without providing
the declarant an opportunity of being heard.
(11) The statement filed under this section shall be made in the form and manner as specified
by the Board through a notification in the official Gazette.
(12) The provisions of this section shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to an existing company being
an industrial undertaking, for investment in expansion and modernization from amount of funds
(which have not been declared in any of the returns of income upto tax year 2021 filed by the 31st
December, 2021):
Provided that such company opens a dedicated bank account to deposit the said funds before
the filing of the statement and such funds shall only be used for expansion and modernization by
way of purchase or import of plant and machinery including IT hardware through letter of credit,
or software and IT services or for construction of building and structure for the manufacturing
premises of the existing industrial undertaking:
Provided further that the expansion and modernization shall be completed by the 30th June,
2024, and a certificate to that effect, duly issued by the Engineering Development Board, is
submitted to the Commissioner along with the return filed for tax year 2024.
(13) In this section, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,—
(a) "declarant" means a person filing a statement under sub-section (1);
