PART VIII
LOSSES
56. Set off of losses.— (1) Subject to sections 58 and 59, where a person
sustains a loss for any tax year under any head of income specified in section 11,
the person shall be entitled to have the amount of the loss set off against the
person’s income, if any, chargeable to tax under any other head of income 1[except
income under the head salary 2[ ] ] for the year 3[:
Provided that the adjustment of business loss shall not be allowed against
income from property for the tax year.]
(2) Except as provided in this Part, where a person sustains a loss under a
head of income for a tax year that cannot be set off under sub-section (1), the person
shall not be permitted to carry the loss forward to the next tax year.
(3) Where,4[in a tax year,]a person sustains a loss under the head
“Income from Business” and a loss under another head of income, the loss under
the head “Income from Business shall be set off last.
5[56A. Set off of losses of companies operating hotels.— Subject to sections
56 and 57, where a 6[public company as defined in the Companies Act, 2017 and]
registered in Pakistan 7[,Gilgit-Baltistan] or Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJ&K),
operating hotels in Pakistan 8[,Gilgit-Baltistan] or AJ&K, sustains a loss in
Pakistan 9[,Gilgit-Baltistan] or AJ&K for any tax year under the head “income from
business” shall be entitled to have the amount of the loss set off against the
company’s income in Pakistan 10[,Gilgit-Baltistan] or AJ&K, as the case may be,
from the tax year 2007 11[onward].
57. Carry forward of business losses.—(1) Where a person sustains a loss
for a tax year under the head “Income from Business” (other than a loss to which
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2013.
The words “or income from property” omitted by the Finance Act, 2021.
Full stop substituted with a colon and thereafter a new proviso added by the Finance Act, 2025.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2002
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2007.
6 The word “company” substituted by the Finance Act, 2019.
After word “Pakistan” the expression “, Gilgit-Baltistan” inserted by the Finance Act, 2019.
After word “Pakistan” the expression “, Gilgit-Baltistan” inserted by the Finance Act, 2019.
After word “Pakistan” the expression “, Gilgit-Baltistan” inserted by the Finance Act, 2019.
After word “Pakistan” the expression “, Gilgit-Baltistan” inserted by the Finance Act, 2019.
The word “onward” substituted by the word “onward” by the Finance Act, 2014.
1[sub-section (4) or] section 58 applies) and the loss cannot be wholly set off under
section 56, so much of the loss that has not been set off shall be carried forward
to the following tax year and set off against the person’s income chargeable under
the head “Income from Business” for that year.
(2) If a loss sustained by a person for a tax year under the head “Income
from Business” is not wholly set off under sub-section (1), then the amount of the
loss not set off shall be carried forward to the following tax year and applied as
specified in sub-section (1) in that year, and so on, but no loss can be carried
forward to more than six tax years immediately succeeding the tax year for which
the loss was first computed.
2[(2A) Where a loss, referred to in sub-section (2), relating to any
assessment year commencing on or after 1st day of July, 1995, and ending on the
30th day of June 2001, is sustained by a banking company wholly owned by the
Federal Government as on first day of June, 2002, which is approved by the State
Bank of Pakistan for the purpose of this sub-section, the said loss shall be carried
forward for a period of ten years.]
3[(2B) Where a loss, referred to in sub-section (2), relating to a tax year
commencing on or after the first day of July, 2020 is sustained by a resident
company engaged in the hotel business in Pakistan, the said loss shall be carried
forward for a period of eight years.]
4[(2C) Where a loss, referred to in sub-section (2), relating to a tax year
commencing on or after the first day of January, 2017 is sustained by Pakistan
International Airlines Corporation Limited, the said loss shall be carried forward for
a period of ten years.]
(3) Where a person has a loss carried forward under this section for more
than one tax year, the loss of the earliest tax year shall be set off first.
5[(4) The loss attributable to deductions allowed under sections 22, 23, 6[ ]
23B and 24 that has not been set off against income, the loss not set off shall be
set off against fifty percent of the person's balance income chargeable under the
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2018.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2002.
3 New sub-section (2B) inserted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
Sub-section (2C) inserted by the Finance Act, 2024.
Sub Section (4) substituted by the finance Act 2018,the substituted subsection (4) is read as follows
“(4) Where the loss referred to in sub-section (1) includes deductions allowed under sections 22, 23
5[23A, 23B] and 24 that have not been set off against income, the amount not set off shall be added to the deductions
allowed under those sections in the following tax year, and so on until completely set off”.
The expression “23A” omitted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier this omission was made through
Tax Laws (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
head "income from business" after setting off loss under sub-section (1), in the
following tax year and so on until completely set off:
Provided that such loss shall be set off against hundred percent of the
said balance income if the taxable income for the year is less than ten million
Rupees."]
(5) In determining whether a person’s deductions under sections 22, 23,
1[ 2[ ] 23B] and 24 have been set off against income, the deductions allowed under
those sections shall be taken into account last.
3[57A. Set off of business loss consequent to amalgamation.—4[(1) The
assessed loss (excluding capital loss) for the tax year, other than brought forward
and capital loss, of the amalgamating company or companies shall be set off
against business profits and gains of the amalgamated company, and vice versa,
in the year of amalgamation and where the loss is not adjusted against the profits
and gains for the tax year the unadjusted loss shall be carried forward for
adjustment upto a period of six tax years succeeding the year of amalgamation.]
(2) The provisions of sub-section (4) and (5) of section 57 shall, mutatis
mutandis, apply for the purposes of allowing unabsorbed depreciation of
amalgamating company or companies in the assessment of amalgamated
company 5[and vice versa]6[:]
7[Provided that the losses referred to in sub-section (1) and
unabsorbed depreciation referred to in sub-section (2) shall be allowed set
off subject to the condition that the amalgamated company continues the
business of the amalgamating company for a minimum period of five years
from the date of amalgamation.]
8[(2A).In case of amalgamation of Banking Company or Non-banking
Finance Company, modarabas or insurance company, the accumulated loss under
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2009.
The expression “23A” omitted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier this omission was made through Tax
Laws (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
Added by the Finance Act, 2002.
Sub-section (1) substituted by the Finance Act, 2007. The substituted sub-section (1) read as follows:
“(1) The accumulated loss under the head “Income from Business” (not being a loss to which section
58 applies) of an amalgamating company or companies shall be set off or carried forward against
the business profits and gains of the amalgamated company and vice versa, up to a period of six
tax years immediately succeeding the tax year in which the loss was first computed in the case of
amalgamated company or amalgamating company or companies.”
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2005.
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2005.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2005.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2008.
the head “Income from Business” (not being speculation business losses) of an
amalgamating company or companies shall be set off or carried forward against
the business profits and gains of the amalgamated company and vice versa, up to
a period of six tax years immediately succeeding the tax year in which the loss was
first computed in the case of amalgamated company or amalgamating company or
companies:
Provided that the provisions of this sub-section shall in the case of
Banking companies be applicable from July 1, 2007.]
(3) Where any of the conditions as laid down by the State Bank of
Pakistan or the Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan 1[or any court],
as the case may be, in the scheme of amalgamation, are not fulfilled, the set off of
loss or allowance for depreciation made in any tax year of the amalgamated
company 2[or the amalgamating company or companies] shall be deemed to be
the income of that amalgamated company 3[or the amalgamating company or
companies, as the case may be,] for the year in which such default is discovered
by the Commissioner or taxation officer, and all the provisions of this Ordinance
shall apply accordingly.]
58. Carry forward of speculation business losses.—(1) Where a person
sustains a loss for a tax year in respect of a speculation business carried on by the
person (hereinafter referred to as a “speculation loss”), the loss shall be set off
only against the income of the person from any other speculation business of the
person chargeable to tax for that year.
(2) If a speculation loss sustained by a person for a tax year is not wholly
set off under sub-section (1), then the amount of the loss not set off shall be carried
forward to the following tax year and applied against the income of any speculation
business of the person in that year and applied as specified in sub-section (1)
in that year, and so on, but no speculation loss shall be carried forward to more
than six tax years immediately succeeding the tax year for which the loss was first
computed.
(3) Where a person has a loss carried forward under this section for more
than one tax year, the loss of the earliest tax year shall be set off first.
59. Carry forward of capital losses.— (1) Where a person sustains a loss for
a tax year under the head “Capital Gains” (hereinafter referred to as a “capital
loss”), the loss shall not be set off against the person’s income, if any, chargeable
under any other head of income for the year, but shall be carried forward to the
next tax year and set off against the capital gain, if any, chargeable under the head
“Capital Gains” for that year.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2005.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2005.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2005.
(2) If a capital loss sustained by a person for a tax year under the head
“Capital Gains” is not wholly set off under sub-section (1), then the amount of the
loss not set off shall be carried forward to the following tax year, and so on, but no
loss shall be carried forward to more than six tax years immediately succeeding
the tax year for which the loss was first computed.
(3) Where a person has a loss carried forward under this section for more
than one tax year, the loss of the earliest tax year shall be set off first.
1[59A. Limitations on set off and carry forward of losses.—
2[ ]
3[ ]
(3) In case of association of persons 4[any loss] shall be set off or carried
forward and set off only against the income of the association.
(4) Nothing contained in section 56, 57, 58 or 59 shall entitle —
(a) any member of an association of persons 5[ ] to set off any loss
sustained by such association of persons, as the case may be,
or have it carried forward and set off, against his income; or
(b) any person who has succeeded, in such capacity, any other
person carrying on any business or profession, otherwise than
by inheritance, to carry forward and set off against his income,
any loss sustained by such other person.
6[(5) Subject to sub-section (4) of section 57, sub-section (12) of section 22 and
sub-section (6), where in computing the taxable income for any tax year,
Added by the Finance Act, 2003.
Sub-section (1) omitted by the Finance Act, 2012. The omitted sub-section (1) read as follows:
“(1) In case of an association of persons to which sub-section (3) of section 92 applies, any loss which
cannot be set off against any other income of the association of persons in accordance with section
56, shall be dealt with as provided under sub-section (2) of section 93.
Sub-section (2) omitted by the Finance Act, 2012. The omitted sub-section (2) read as follows:
“(2) Nothing contained in section 57, section 58 or section 59 shall entitle an association of persons,
to which sub-section (3) of section 92 applies to have its loss carried forward and set off thereunder.
The words, figures, commas and brackets “, to which sub-section (3) of section 92 does not apply,
any loss for such association” substituted by the Finance Act, 2012.
The words, figures, commas and brackets “to which sub-section (3) of section 92 does not apply,”
omitted by the Finance Act, 2012.
Sub section (5) substituted by the finance Act 2018,the substituted sub section (5) is read as follows
“(5) Where in computing the taxable income for any tax year, full effect cannot be given to
a deduction mentioned in section 22, 23, 24 or 25 owing to there being no profits or gains
chargeable for that year or such profits or gains being less than the deduction, then, subject to
sub-section (12) of section 22, and sub-section (6), the deduction or part of the deduction to which
effect has not been given, as the case may be, shall be added to the amount of such deduction
full effect cannot be given to the loss relating to deductions under section
22, 23, 24 or 25 owing to there being no profits or gains chargeable for
that year or such profits or gains as mentioned in
sub-section (4) of section 57, being less than the said loss, the loss or
part of the loss, as the case may be, shall be set off against fifty percent
of the person’s income chargeable under the head “income from
business” for the following year or if there is no “income from business”
for that year, be set off against fifty percent of the person’s income
chargeable under the head ”income from business” for the next following
year and soon for succeeding years.]
(6) Where, under sub-section (5), deduction is also to be carried forward,
effect shall first be given to the provisions of section 56 and sub-section (2) of section
58.
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Ordinance, no loss which
has not been assessed or determined in pursuance of an order made under
section 59, 59A, 62, 63 or 65 of the repealed Ordinance or an order made or
treated as made under section 120, 121 or 122 shall be carried forward and set off
under section 57, sub-section (2)of section 58 or section 59.]
1[59AA. Group taxation.— (1) Holding companies and subsidiary companies of
100% owned group may opt to be taxed as one fiscal unit. In such cases, besides
consolidated group accounts as required under the 2[Companies Act, 2017 (XIX of
2017)], computation of income and tax payable shall be made for tax purposes.
(2) The companies in the group shall give irrevocable option for taxation
under this section as one fiscal unit.
(3) The group taxation shall be restricted to companies locally
incorporated under the 3[Companies Act, 2017 (XIX of 2017)].
(4) The relief under group taxation would not be available to losses prior
to the formation of the group.
(5) The option of group taxation shall be available to those group
companies which comply with such corporate governance requirements 4[and
group designation rules or regulations] as may be specified by the Securities and
Exchange Commission of Pakistan from time to time and are designated as
companies entitled to avail group taxation.
for the following year and be treated to be part of that deduction, or if there is no such deduction
for that year, be treated to be the deduction for that year and so on for succeeding years.”
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2007.
The expression “Companies Ordinance, 1984 (XLVII of 1984)” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
The expression “Companies Ordinance, 1984 (XLVII of 1984)” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2013.
(6) Group taxation may be regulated through rules as may be made by
the1[Board].
2[59B. Group relief.— (1) Subject to sub-section (2), any company, being a
subsidiary 3[or] a holding company, may surrender its assessed loss 4[as computed
in sub-section (1A)] (excluding capital loss) for the tax year (other than brought
forward losses and capital losses), in favour of its holding company or its subsidiary
or between another subsidiary of the holding company:
Provided that where one of the company in the group is a public
company listed on a registered stock exchange in Pakistan, the holding
company shall directly hold fifty-five per cent or more of the share capital of
the subsidiary company. Where none of the companies in the group is a listed
company, the holding company shall hold directly seventy-five per cent or
more of the share capital of the subsidiary company.
5[(1A) The loss to be surrendered under sub-section (1) shall be
allowed as per following formula, namely:-
(A/100) x B
where—
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the word “Board” by the Finance Act. 2014.
Section 59B substituted by the Finance Act, 2007. The substituted section 59B read as follows:
“59B. Group Relief.- (1) Subject to sub-section (2), any company, being a subsidiary of a public
company listed on a registered stock exchange in Pakistan, owning and managing an industrial
undertaking or an undertaking engaged in providing services, may surrender its assessed loss for
the tax year other than brought forward losses, in favour of its holding company provided such
holding company owns or acquires seventy-five per cent or more of the share capital of the subsidiary
company.
(2) The loss surrendered by the subsidiary company may be claimed by the holding
company for set off against its income under the head “income from Business” in the tax year and the
following two tax years subject to the following conditions, namely:-
(a) there is continued ownership of share capital of the subsidiary company to the
extent of seventy-five per cent or more for five years; and
(b) the subsidiary company continues the same business during the said period of
five years.
(3) The subsidiary company shall not be allowed to surrender its assessed losses for set
off against income of the holding company for more than three tax years.
(4) Where the losses surrendered by a subsidiary company are not adjusted against
income of the holding company in the said three tax years, the subsidiary company shall carry forward
the unadjusted losses in accordance with the provision of section 57.
(5) If there has been any disposal of shares by the holding company during the aforesaid
period of five years to bring the ownership of the holding company to less than seventy-five per cent,
the holding company shall, in the year of disposal, offer the amount of profit on which taxes have not
been paid due to set off of losses surrendered by the subsidiary company.”
3 The word “of” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2016.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2016.
A is the percentage share capital held by the holding
company of its subsidiary company; and
B is the assessed loss of the subsidiary company.]
(2) The loss surrendered by the subsidiary company may be claimed by
the holding company or a subsidiary company for set off against its income under
the head “Income from Business” in the tax year and the following two tax years
subject to the following conditions, namely:—
(a) there is continued ownership for five years, of share capital of
the subsidiary company to the extent of fifty-five per cent in the
case of a listed company, or seventy-five per cent or more, in
the case of other companies;
(b) a company within the group engaged in the business of trading
shall not be entitled to avail group relief;
1[(ba) a company or companies within the group whose income from
business is chargeable to tax under any provisions of this
Ordinance other than Division II of Part I of the First Schedule
to the Ordinance shall not be entitled to avail group relief;]
(c) holding company, being a private limited company with seventy-
five per cent of ownership of share capital gets itself listed within
three years from the year in which loss is claimed;
(d) the group companies are locally incorporated companies under
the 2[Companies Act, 2017 (XIX of 2017)];
(e) the loss surrendered and loss claimed under this section shall have
approval of the Board of Directors of the respective companies;
(f) the subsidiary company continues the same business during
the said period of three years;
(g) all the companies in the group shall comply with such corporate
governance requirements 3[and group designation rules or
regulations] as may be specified by the Securities and
Exchange Commission of Pakistan from time to time, and are
designated as companies entitled to avail group relief; and
Clause (ba) inserted by the Finance Act, 2025.
The expression “Companies Ordinance, 1984 (XLVII of 1984)” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2013.
(h) any other condition as may be prescribed.
(3) The subsidiary company shall not be allowed to surrender its
assessed losses for set off against income of the holding company for more than
three tax years.
(4) Where the losses surrendered by a subsidiary company are not
adjusted against income of the holding company in the said three tax years, the
subsidiary company shall carry forward the unadjusted losses in accordance with
section 57.
(5) If there has been any disposal of shares by the holding company
during the aforesaid period of five years to bring the ownership of the holding
company to less than fifty-five per cent or seventy-five per cent, as the case may
be, the holding company shall, in the year of disposal, offer the amount of profit on
which taxes have not been paid due to set off of losses surrendered by the
subsidiary company.
(6) Loss claiming company shall, with the approval of the Board of
Directors, transfer cash to the loss surrendering company equal to the amount of
tax payable on the profits to be set off against the acquired loss at the applicable
tax rate. The transfer of cash would not be taken as a taxable event in the case of
either of the two companies.
(7) The transfer of shares between companies and the share holders, in
one direction, would not be taken as a taxable event provided the transfer is to
acquire share capital for formation of the group and approval of the Security and
Exchange Commission of Pakistan or State Bank of Pakistan, as the case may be,
has been obtained in this effect. Sale and purchase from third party would be taken
as taxable event.]
1[ ]
1 Section 59C shall be omitted and shall be deemed to have been omitted with effect from 2nd March,
2022 through Finance Act, 2022. The omitted section read as follows:
59C. Carry forward of business losses of sick industrial units.- (I) Subject to sub-section (2),
where a company hereinafter referred to as acquiring company, acquires under a scheme of
acquisition majority share capital of another company being a sick industrial unit, hereinafter referred
to as acquired company, the acquiring company shall be entitled to adjust loss for the latest tax year
and brought forward assessed business losses excluding capital loss of the acquired company subject
to provisions of section 57 for a period of three years.
(2) Sub-section (I) shall apply subject to the following conditions, namely:– (a) there is continued
ownership for five years starting from the 30th June, 2023 and there is no change in share capital of
the acquiring company;
(b) the assets of the acquired company shall not be sold upto the 30" June, 2026; and
(c) the acquired company continues the same business till the 30th June, 2026.
(3) Where the losses surrendered by the acquired company are not adjusted against income of
the acquiring company in the said three tax years, the acquired company shall carry forward the
unadjusted losses in accordance with section 57.
