CHAPTER II
CHARGE OF TAX
4. Tax on taxable income.— (1) Subject to this Ordinance, income tax shall
be imposed for each tax year, at the rate or rates specified in 1[Division I 2[ ] or II]
of Part I of the First Schedule, as the case may be, on every person who has
taxable income for the year.
(2) The income tax payable by a taxpayer for a tax year shall be computed
by applying the rate or rates of tax applicable to the taxpayer under this Ordinance
to the taxable income of the taxpayer for the year, and from the resulting amount
shall be subtracted any tax credits allowed to the taxpayer for the year.
(3) Where a taxpayer is allowed more than one tax credit for a tax year,
the credits shall be applied in the following order –
(a) any foreign tax credit allowed under section 103; then
(b) any tax credit allowed under Part X of Chapter III; and then
(c) any tax credit allowed under sections 3[ ] 147 and 168.
(4) Certain classes of income (including the income of certain classes of
persons) may be subject to –
(a) separate taxation as provided 4[under this chapter]; or
(b) collection of tax under Division II of Part V of Chapter X or
deduction of tax under Division III of Part V of Chapter X as a
final tax on the income 5[of] the person.
(5) Income referred to in sub-section (4) shall be subject to tax as
provided for 6[under this chapter], or Part V of Chapter X, as the case may be, and
shall not be included in the computation of taxable income in accordance with
section 8 or 169, as the case may be.
The words and letters “Division I or II” substituted by the Finance Act, 2010.
2 The expression “IB” omitted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
The figure and comma “140,” omitted by the Finance Act, 2003.
The expression “in sections 5, 6 and 7” substituted by the Finance Act, 2022.
The word “or” substituted by the Finance Act, 2010.
The expression “in sections 5, 6 and 7” substituted by the Finance Act, 2022.
1[(6) Where, by virtue of any provision of this Ordinance, income tax is to
be deducted at source or collected or paid in advance, it shall, as the case may
be, be so deducted, collected or paid, accordingly 2[.] ]
3[ ]
4[(4AB) Subject to this Ordinance, a surcharge shall be payable by every individual
and association of persons at the rate of ten percent of the income tax imposed
under Division I of Part I of the First Schedule where the taxable income exceeds
rupees ten million 5[:
Provided that in case of an individual deriving income chargeable under
the head “Salary”, a surcharge shall be payable at the rate of nine percent of the
income tax imposed under Division I of Part I of the First Schedule where the
taxable income exceeds rupees ten million in a tax year.]
6[4B. Super tax for rehabilitation of temporarily displaced persons.― (1) A
super tax shall be imposed for rehabilitation of temporarily displaced persons, for
tax years 2015 7[and onwards], at the rates specified in Division IIA of Part I of the
First Schedule, on income of every person specified in the said Division.
(2) For the purposes of this section, “income” shall be the sum of the
following:—
(i) profit on debt, dividend, capital gains, brokerage and
commission;
Added by the Finance Act, 2003.
The semicolon substituted by the Finance Act, 2005.
Omitted by the Finance Act, 2014. Section 4A was added by Income Tax (Amendment) Ordinance,
dated 30.05.2011. Earlier the identical section 4A was added by Income Tax (Amendment)
Ordinance, dated 16.03.2011. The omitted section 4A read as follows: —
“4A Surcharge. — (1) Subject to this Ordinance, a surcharge shall be payable by every taxpayer at
the rate of fifteen per cent of the income tax payable under this Ordinance including the tax payable
under Part V of Chapter X of Chapter XIII, as the case may be, for the period commencing from the
promulgation of this Ordinance, till the 30th June, 2011.
(2) Surcharge shall be paid, collected, educated and deposited at the same time and in the
same manner as the tax is paid, collected, deducted and deposited under this Ordinance including
Chapter X or XII as the case may be:
Provided that this surcharge shall not be payable for the tax year 2010 and prior tax years
and shall be applicable, subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), for the tax year 2011
only.”
Section (4AB) inserted by the Finance Act, 2024.
Full stop substituted by semi-colon and a new proviso added by the Finance Act, 2025.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2015.
The “expression” “to 2020” substituted by “and onwards” through Finance Supplementary (Second
Amendment) Act, 2019.
(ii) taxable income1[(other than brought forward depreciation and
brought forward business losses)] under section (9) of this
Ordinance, if not included in clause (i);
(iii) imputable income as defined in clause (28A) of section 2
excluding amounts specified in clause (i); and
(iv) income computed, 2[other than brought forward depreciation,
brought forward amortization and brought forward business
lossess] under Fourth, Fifth, Seventh and Eighth Schedules.
(3) The super tax payable under sub-section (1) shall be paid, collected
and deposited on the date and in the manner as specified in sub-section (1) of
section 137 and all provisions of Chapter X of the Ordinance shall apply.
(4) Where the super tax is not paid by a person liable to pay it, the
Commissioner shall by an order in writing, determine the super tax payable, and
shall serve upon the person, a notice of demand specifying the super tax payable
and within the time specified under section 137 of the Ordinance.
(5) Where the super tax is not paid by a person liable to pay it, the
Commissioner shall recover the super tax payable under subsection (1) and the
provisions of Part IV,X, XI and XII of Chapter X and Part I of Chapter XI of the
Ordinance shall, so far as may be, apply to the collection of super tax as these
apply to the collection of tax under the Ordinance.
(6) The Board may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this section.]
3[4C. Super tax on high earning persons.― (1) A super tax shall be imposed for
tax year 2022 and onwards at the rates specified in Division IIB of Part I of the First
Schedule, on income of every person:
Provided that this section shall not apply to a banking company for tax
year 2022.
(2) For the purposes of this section, “income” shall be the sum of the
following:—
(i) profit on debt, dividend, capital gains, brokerage and commission;
(ii) taxable income (other than brought forward depreciation and
brought forward business losses) under section 9 of the Ordinance,
excluding amounts specified in clause (i);
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2016.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2019.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2022.
(iii) imputable income as defined in clause (28A) of section 2 excluding
amounts specified in clause (i); and
(iv) income computed, other than brought forward depreciation,
brought forward amortization and brought forward business losses
under Fourth, Fifth 1[, Seventh and Eighth] Schedules.
(3) The tax payable under sub-section (1) shall be paid, collected and
deposited on the date and in the manner as specified in sub-section (1) of section
137 and all provisions of Chapter X of the Ordinance shall apply.
(4) Where the tax is not paid by a person liable to pay it, the
Commissioner shall by an order in writing, determine the tax payable, and shall
serve upon the person, a notice of demand specifying the tax payable and within
the time specified under section 137 of the Ordinance.
(5) Where the tax is not paid by a person liable to pay it, the
Commissioner shall recover the tax payable under sub-section (1) and the
provisions of Part IV, X, XI and XII of Chapter X and Part I of Chapter XI of the
Ordinance shall, so far as may be, apply to the collection of tax as these apply to
the collection of tax under the Ordinance.
2[(5A) The provisions of section 147 shall apply on tax payable under this
section.]
(6) The Board may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this section.]
5. Tax on dividends.— (1) Subject to this Ordinance, a tax shall be imposed,
at the rate specified in Division III of Part I of the First Schedule, on every person
who receives a dividend from a 3[ ] company 4[or treated as dividend under clause
(19) of section 2].
(2) The tax imposed under sub-section (1) on a person who receives a
dividend shall be computed by applying the relevant rate of tax to the gross amount
of the dividend.
(3) This section shall not apply to a dividend that is exempt from tax under
this Ordinance.
The words “and Seventh” substituted by the Finance Act, 2023.
The sub-section (5A) inserted by the Finance Act, 2023.
The word “resident” omitted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2009.
1[5A. Tax on undistributed profits.—(1) For tax 2[years 2017 to 2019], a tax shall
be imposed at the rate of 3[five] percent of its accounting profit before tax on every
public company, other than a scheduled bank or a modaraba, that derives profit
for a tax year but does not distribute at least 4[twenty] percent of its after tax
profits within six months of the end of the tax year through cash 5[ ]:
Provided that for tax year 2017, bonus shares or cash dividends may
be distributed before the due date mentioned in sub-section (2) of section
118, for filing of a return.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply to—
(a) a company qualifying for exemption under clause (132) of Part
I of the Second Schedule; and
(b) a company in which not less than fifty percent shares are held
by the Government.]
6[5AA. Tax on return on investments in sukuks.—(1) Subject to this Ordinance,
a tax shall be imposed, at the rate specified in Division IIIB of Part I of the First
section 5A substituted by the Finance Act, 2017. The substituted section read as follows:-
“5A. Tax on undistributed reserves.—(1) Subject to this Ordinance, a tax shall be imposed at the
rate of ten percent, on every public company other than a scheduled bank or a modaraba, that derives
profits for a tax year but does not distribute cash dividends within six months of the end of the said tax
year or distributes dividends to such an extent that its reserves, after such distribution, are in excess of
hundred percent of its paid up capital, so much of its reserves as exceed hundred per cent of its paid
up capital shall be treated as income of the said company:
Provided that for tax year 2015, cash dividends may be distributed before the due date
mentioned in sub-section (2) of section 118, for filing of return for tax year 2015.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply to—
(a) a public company which distributes profit equal to either forty per cent of its after tax
profits or fifty per cent of its paid up capital, whichever is less, within six months of
the end of the tax year;
(a) a company qualifying for exemption under clause (132) of Part I of the Second
Schedule; and
(b) a company in which not less than fifty percent shares are held by the Government.
(3) For the purpose of this section, ‘reserve‘ includes amounts setaside out of revenue or other
surpluses excluding capital reserves, share premium reserves and reserves required to be
created under any law, rules or regulations.”]
The “expression” “year 2017 and onwards” substituted by “years 2017 to 2019” through Finance
Supplementary (Second Amendment) Act, 2019
The word “seven and half” substituted by the Finance Act, 2018
The word “forty” substituted by the Finance Act, 2018
The word “or bonus shares” omitted by the Finance Act, 2018
Inserted by the Presidential Order No. F.2(1)/2016-Pub dated 31.08.2016.
Schedule, on every person who receives a return on investment in sukuks from a
special purpose vehicle1[, or a company].
(2) The tax imposed under sub-section (1) on a person who receives a
return on investment in sukuks shall be computed by applying the relevant rate of
tax to the gross amount of the return on investment in sukuks.
(3) This section shall not apply to a return on investment in sukuks that is
exempt from tax under this Ordinance.”]
6. Tax on certain payments to non-residents.— (1) Subject to this
Ordinance, a tax shall be imposed, at the rate specified in Division IV of Part I of
the First Schedule, on every non-resident person who receives any Pakistan-
source royalty 2[, fee for offshore digital services 3[, fee for money transfer
operations, card network services, payment gateway services, interbank financial
telecommunication services] ] or fee for technical services.
(2) The tax imposed under sub-section (1) on a non-resident person shall
be computed by applying the relevant rate of tax to the gross 4[amounts of receipts
mentioned in sub-section (1)].
(3) This section shall not apply to —
(a) any royalty where the property or right giving rise to the royalty
is effectively connected with a permanent establishment in
Pakistan of the non-resident person;
(b) any fee 5[ ] where the services giving rise to the fee are
rendered through a permanent establishment in Pakistan of the
non-resident person; or
(c) any royalty or fee for technical services that is exempt from tax
under this Ordinance.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2017
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2018
The expression inserted by the Finance Act, 2022.
4 The expression “amount of the royalty 4[,free for offshore digital services] or fee for technical
services” substituted by the Finance Act, 2022.
5 The expression “for technical services 5[or fee for offshore digital services” omitted by the Finance
Act, 2022.
(4) Any Pakistani-source royalty 1[ 2[or fee] received by a non-resident
person to which this section does not apply by virtue of clause (a) or (b) of sub-
section (3) shall be treated as income from business attributable to the permanent
establishment in Pakistan of the person.
3[6A. Tax on payments for digital transactions in e-commerce platforms.– (1)
Subject to this Ordinance, a tax shall be imposed, at the rate specified in Division
IVA of Part I of the First Schedule, on every person who receives payment for
supply of digitally ordered goods or services which are delivered from within
Pakistan using locally operated online platforms including online marketplace or
websites:
Provided that the export proceeds subjected to withholding under section
154 and 154A shall not fall within the ambit of this section.
(2) The tax imposed under sub-section (1) shall be computed by applying
the relevant rate of tax to the gross amounts of receipts mentioned in sub-section
(1).]
7. Tax on shipping and air transport income of a non-resident person.—
(1) Subject to this Ordinance, a tax shall be imposed, at the rate specified in
Division V of Part I of the First Schedule, on every non-resident person carrying on
the business of operating ships or aircrafts as the owner or charterer thereof in
respect of –
(a) the gross amount received or receivable (whether in or out of
Pakistan) for the carriage of passengers, livestock, mail or
goods embarked in Pakistan; and
(b) the gross amount received or receivable in Pakistan for the
carriage of passengers, livestock, mail or goods embarked
outside Pakistan.
(2) The tax imposed under sub-section (1) on a non-resident person shall
be computed by applying the relevant rate of tax to the gross amount referred to
in sub-section (1).
(3) This section shall not apply to any amounts exempt from tax under
this Ordinance.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2018
The expression “, fee for offshore digital services] or fee for technical services” substituted by the
Finance Act, 2022.
Section 6A inserted by the Finance Act, 2025.
1[7A. Tax on shipping of a resident person.—(1) In the case of any resident
person engaged in the business of shipping, a presumptive income tax shall be
charged in the following manner, namely:—
(a) ships and all floating crafts including tugs, dredgers, survey
vessels and other specialized craft purchased or bare-boat
chartered and flying Pakistan flag shall pay tonnage tax of an
amount equivalent to one US $ per gross registered tonnage
per annum; 2[ ]
(b) ships, vessels and all floating crafts including tugs, dredgers,
survey vessels and other specialized craft not registered in
Pakistan and hired under any charter other than bare-boat
charter shall pay tonnage tax of an amount equivalent to fifteen
US cents per ton of gross registered tonnage per chartered
voyage provided that such tax shall not exceed one US $ per
ton of gross registered tonnage per annum:
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, the
expression “equivalent amount” means the rupee equivalent of a
US dollar according to the exchange rate prevalent on the first day
of December in the case of a company and the first day of
September in other cases in the relevant assessment year 3[;and
(c) A Pakistan resident ship owning company registered with the
Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan after the 15th
day of November, 2019 and having its own sea worthy vessel
registered under Pakistan Flag shall pay tonnage tax of an
amount equivalent to seventy five US Cents per ton of gross
registered tonnage per annum.]
(2) The provisions of this section shall not be applicable after the
30thJune, 4[2030].”]
5[7B. Tax on profit on debt.—(1) Subject to this Ordinance, a tax shall be
imposed, at the rate specified in Division IIIA of Part I of the First Schedule, on
every person, other than a company, who receives a profit on debt from any person
mentioned in clauses (a) to (d) of sub-section (1)of section 151.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2015
2 The word “and” omitted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
Full stop at the end substituted by semi-colon and the word “and” thereafter new clause “(c)” shall
be added namely through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
4 The word 2020 substituted by 2030 through Finance Act 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2015
(2) The tax imposed under sub-section (1) on a person, other than a
company, who receives a profit on debt shall be computed by applying the relevant
rate of tax to the gross amount of the profit on debt.
1[(3) This section shall not apply to a profit on debt that –
(a) is exempt from tax under this Ordinance; or
(b) exceeds 2[five] million Rupees.]
3[7C. Tax on builders.— (1) Subject to this Ordinance, a tax shall be imposed
on the profits and gains of a person deriving income from the business of
construction and sale of residential, commercial or other buildings at the rates
specified in Division VIIIA of Part I of the First Schedule.
(2) The tax imposed under sub-section (1) shall be computed by applying
the relevant rate of tax to the area of the residential, commercial or other building
being constructed for sale.
(3) The Board may prescribe:
(a) the mode and manner for payment and collection of tax under this
section;
(b) the authorities granting approval for computation and payment plan
of tax; and
(c) responsibilities and powers of the authorities approving, suspending
and cancelling no objection certificate to sell and the matters
connected and ancillary thereto.
4[(4) This section shall apply to projects undertaken for construction and
sale of residential and commercial buildings initiated and approved.─
(a) during tax year 2017 only;
(b) for which payment under rule 13S of the Income Tax Rules, 2002 has
been made by the developer during tax year 2017; and
Sub clause 3 of 7B substituted by Finance Act, 2019, substituted clause read as follow:
“(3) This section shall not apply to a profit on debt that is exempt from tax under this Ordinance.”
2 The words “thirty six” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2016.
Section 4 substituted by the Finance Act, 2017. The substituted section read as follows:
“This section shall apply to business or projects undertaken for construction and sale of residential,
commercial or other buildings initiated and approved after the 1st July, 2016.”]
(c) the Chief Commissioner has issued online schedule of advance tax
installments to be paid by the developer in accordance with rule 13U
of the Income Tax Rules, 2002.]
1[7D. Tax on developers.—(1) Subject to this Ordinance, a tax shall be imposed
on the profits and gains of a person deriving income from the business of
development and sale of residential, commercial or other plots at the rates
specified in Division VIIIB of Part I of the First Schedule.
(2) The tax imposed under sub-section (1) shall be computed by applying
the relevant rate of tax to the area of the residential, commercial or other plots for
sale.
(3) The Board may prescribe:
(a) the mode and manner for payment and collection of tax under
this section;
(b) the authorities granting approval for computation and payment
plan of tax; and
(c) responsibilities and powers of the authorities approving,
suspending and cancelling no objection certificate to sell and the
matters connected and ancillary thereto.
2[(4) This section shall apply to projects undertaken for development and
sale of residential and commercial plots initiated and approved.─
(a) during tax year 2017 only;
(b) for which payment under rule 13S of the Income Tax Rules, 2002 has
been made by the developer during tax year 2017; and
(c) the Chief Commissioner has issued online schedule of advance tax
installments to be paid by the developer in accordance with rule 13ZB
of the Income Tax Rules, 2002.”;
3[7E. Tax on deemed income.- (1) For tax year 2022 and onwards, a tax shall
be imposed at the rates specified in Division VIIIC of Part-I of the First Schedule
on the income specified in this section.
(2) A resident person shall be treated to have derived, as income
chargeable to tax under this section, an amount equal to five percent of the fair
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2016.
Section 4 substituted by the Finance Act, 2017. The substituted section read as follows:
“This section shall apply to projects undertaken for development and sale of residential,
commercial or other plots initiated and approved after the 1st July, 2016.”
Section 7E inserted by the Finance Act, 2022.
market value of capital assets situated in Pakistan held on the last day of tax year
excluding the following, namely:–
(a) one capital asset owned by the resident person;
(b) self-owned business premises from where the business is
carried out by the persons appearing on the active taxpayers’
list at any time during the year;
(c) self-owned agriculture land where agriculture activity is carried
out by person excluding farmhouse and land annexed thereto;
(d) capital asset allotted to –
(i) a Shaheed or dependents of a shaheed belonging to
Pakistan Armed Forces;
(ii) a person or dependents of the person who dies while in the
service of Pakistan armed forces or Federal or provincial
government;
(iii) a war wounded person while in service of Pakistan armed
forces or Federal or provincial government; and
(iv) an ex-serviceman and serving personal of armed forces or
ex-employees or serving personnel of Federal and
provincial governments, being original allottees of the
capital asset duly certified by the allotment authority;
(e) any property from which income is chargeable to tax under the
Ordinance and tax leviable is paid thereon;
(f) capital asset in the first tax year of acquisition where tax under
section 236K has been paid;
(g) where the fair market value of the capital assets in aggregate
excluding the capital assets mentioned in clauses (a), (b), (c),
(d), (e) and (f) does not exceed Rupees twenty-five million;
(h) capital assets owned by a provincial government or a local
government; or
(i) capital assets owned by a local authority, a development
authority, builders and developers for land development and
construction, subject to the condition that such persons are
registered with Directorate General of Designated Non-
Financial Businesses and Professions 1[:
Provided that the exclusions mentioned at clauses (a), (e), (f)
and (g) of this sub-section shall not apply in case of a person not
appearing in the active taxpayers’ list, other than persons covered in
rule 2 of the Tenth Schedule.]
(3) The Federal Government may include or exclude any person or
property for the purpose of this section.
(4) In this section–
(a) “capital asset” means property of any kind held by a person,
whether or not connected with a business, but does not include
–
(i) any stock-in-trade, consumable stores or raw materials
held for the purpose of business;
(ii) any shares, stocks or securities;
(iii) any property with respect to which the person is entitled
to a depreciation deduction under section 22 or
amortization deduction under section 24; or
(iv) any movable asset not mentioned in clauses (i), (ii) or (iii);
(b) “farmhouse” means a house constructed on a total minimum
area of 2000 square yards with a minimum covered area of 5000
square feet used as a single dwelling unit with or without an
annex:
Provided that where there are more than one dwelling
units in a compound and the average area of the compound is
more than 2000 square yards for a dwelling unit, each one of
such dwelling units shall be treated as a separate farmhouse.
2[7F. Tax on builders and developers. – (1) A tax shall be imposed at the rate
specified in Division I or II of Part-I of the First Schedule on the taxable profit of
every person deriving income from the business of –
(a) construction and sale of residential, commercial or other buildings;
(b) development and sale of residential commercial or other plots; or
(c) activities as mentioned in (a) and (b) above.
The full stop substituted with colon and new proviso added by the Finance Act, 2023.
Section 7F inserted by the Finance Act, 2024.
(2) For the purpose of this section, taxable profit shall be –
(a) ten percent of gross receipts in respect of activities specified in clause
(a) of sub-section (1);
(b) fifteen percent of gross receipts in respect of activities specified in
clause (b) of sub-section (1); and
(c) twelve percent of gross receipts in respect of activities specified in
clause (c) of sub-section (1).
Explanation.- For the removal of doubt, it is clarified that the provisions of
this section shall only apply in respect of income accruing from gross receipts from
activities specified in sub-section (1) and shall not be applicable to income or
incomes from any other source or under any head of income.
(3) Where a taxpayer, while explaining the nature and source of the
amount credited or the investment made, money or valuable article owned or the
funds from which the expenditure was made, takes into account any source of
income which is subject to tax under this section, the taxpayer shall not be allowed
to take credit of any sum as is in excess of taxable profit:
Provided that where taxable income under section 9 is more than the taxable
profit under this section, taxpayer shall be entitled to take credit of such taxable
income subject to the payment of tax at the rate specified in Division I or II of Part-
I of First Schedule.
(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply to a builder or developer
established by an Act of the Parliament or a Provincial Assembly or by a
Presidential Order and who is engaged in activities for the benefit of its employees
or otherwise including activities for the planning and development of and for
providing and regulating housing and ancillary facilities in a specified or notified
area.]
8. General provisions relating to taxes imposed under sections 1[ 2[ 3[5,
5A, 5AA, 6, 6A,] 7, 7A, 7B and 7E]. – (1) Subject to this Ordinance, the tax
imposed under Sections 4[ 5[5, 5A, 5AA, 6, 6A,] 7, 7A, 7B and 7E] shall be a final
tax on the amount in respect of which the tax is imposed and—
1 The expression “5, 6 and 7” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
The expression “5, 5AA, 6, 7, 7A and 7B” substituted by the Finance Act, 2022.
The expression “5, 5AA, 6,” substituted by the Finance Act, 2025.
4 The expression ”5, 4[ ] 4[ ] 4[“, 5AA”] 6, 7, 7A 4[and 7B]”” substituted by the Finance Act, 2022.
The expression “5, 5AA, 6,” substituted by the Finance Act, 2025.
(a) such amount shall not be chargeable to tax under any head of
income in computing the taxable income of the person who
derives it for any tax year;
(b) no deduction shall be allowable under this Ordinance for any
expenditure incurred in deriving the amount;
(c) the amount shall not be reduced by —
(i) any deductible allowance; or
(ii) the set off of any loss;
(d) the tax payable by a person under 1[section] 2[5, 5A, 5AA, 6,
6A,] 7, 3[7A, 7B and 7E] shall not be reduced by any tax credits
allowed under this Ordinance; and
(e) the liability of a person under 4[section] 5, 6 5[, 6A] or 7 shall
be discharged to the extent that —
(i) in the case of shipping and air transport income, the tax
has been paid in accordance with section 143 or 144, as
the case may be; or
(ii) in any other case, the tax payable has been deducted at
source under Division III of Part V of Chapter X 6[.]
7[ ]
The word “sections” substituted by the word “section”by the Finance Act, 2014.
2 The expression “5, 2[5A,2[“, 5AA”] 6,” substituted by the Finance Act, 2025.
The expression “7A and 7B” substituted by the Finance Act, 2022.
The word “sections” substituted by the word “section”by the Finance Act, 2014.
The expression inserted by the Finance Act, 2025.
Colon substituted by the Finance Act, 2013.
Proviso omitted by the Finance Act, 2013. The omitted proviso read as follows:
“Provided that the provision of this section shall not apply to dividend received by a company.”
