CHAPTER XII
TRANSITIONAL ADVANCE TAX PROVISIONS
1[ ]
2[ ]
3[ ]
4[ ]
5[ ]
6[ ]
7[231AB. Advance tax on cash withdrawal. — (1) Every banking company shall
deduct advance adjustable tax at the rate of 8[0.8%] of the cash withdrawal from a
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2005.
Section 231A omitted by the Finance Act, 2021. The omitted section read as follows:
“231A. Cash withdrawal from a bank.—2[(1) Every banking company shall deduct tax at the rate
specified in Division VI of Part IV of the First Schedule, if the payment for cash withdrawal, or the
sum total of the payments for cash withdrawal in a day, exceeds 2[fifty] thousand rupees.]
2[“Explanation.- For removal of doubt, it is clarified that the said fifty thousand rupees
shall be aggregate withdrawals from all the bank accounts in a single day.”
Sub-section (2) omitted by Finance Act, 2015. The omitted sub-section (2) read as follows:-
“(2) Advance tax under this section shall not be collected in the case of withdrawals made by,-
(a) the Federal Government or a Provincial Government;
(b) a foreign diplomat or a diplomatic mission in Pakistan; or
(c) a person who produces a certificate from the Commissioner that his income
during the tax year is exempt.”
Added by the Finance Act, 2010.
Section 231AA omitted by the Finance Act, 2021. The omitted section read as follows:
“231AA. Advance tax on transactions in bank.— (1) Every banking company, non-banking financial
institution, exchange company or any authorized dealer of foreign exchange shall collect advance tax
at the time of sale against cash of any instrument, including Demand Draft, Pay Order, CDR, STDR,
SDR, RTC, or any other instrument of bearer nature or on receipt of cash on cancellation of any of
these instruments5[“.”] 5[ ]
(2) Every banking company, non-banking financial institution, exchange company or any
authorized dealer of foreign exchange shall collect advance tax at the time of transfer of any sum
against cash through online transfer, telegraphic transfer, mail transfer or any other mode of electronic
transfer.
(3) The advance tax under this section shall be collected at the rate specified in Division
VIA of Part IV of the First Schedule, where the sum total of payments for transactions mentioned in
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) as the case may be, exceed twenty-five thousand rupees in a day.
Sub-section (4) omitted by Finance Act, 2015. Omitted sub-section (4) read as follows:-
“(4) Advance tax under this section shall not be collected in the case of transactions made by,—
(a) the Federal Government or a Provincial Government;
(b) a foreign diplomat or a diplomatic mission in Pakistan; or
(c) a person who produces a certificate from the Commissioner that its income during the
tax year is exempt.]
Section 231AB inserted by the Finance Act, 2023.
The expression “0.6%” substituted by the Finance Act 2025.
person whose name is not appearing in the active taxpayers’ list on the sum total
of the payments for cash withdrawal in a day, exceeding fifty thousand rupees.
Explanation. – For removal of doubt, it is clarified that the said fifty thousand
rupees shall be aggregate cash withdrawals in a single day.]
1[231B. Advance tax on 2[ ] motor vehicles.— (1) Every motor vehicle
registering authority of Excise and Taxation Despartment shall collect advance tax
at the time of registration of a motor vehicle, at the rates specified in Division VII
of Part IV of the First Schedule 3[:]
4[Provided that no collection of advance tax under this sub-
section shall be made after five years from the date of first registration
as specified in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of sub-section (6).]
5[6[(1A) Every leasing company or a scheduled bank or a non-banking financial
institution or an investment bank or a modaraba or a development finance institution,
whether shariah compliant or under conventional mode, at the time of leasing of a
motor vehicle to a 7[“person whose name is not appearing in the active taxpayers’ list”],
either through ijara or otherwise, shall collect advance tax at the rate of four per cent
of the value of the motor vehicle. ]
(2) Every motor vehicle registering authority of Excise and Taxation
Department shall collect advance tax at the time of transfer of registration or
ownership of a 8[ ] motor vehicle, at the rates specified in Division VII of Part IV
of the First Schedule:
Section 231B substituted by the Finance Act, 2014. The substituted section 231B read as follows:
1[231B. Advance tax on private motor vehicles.— Every motor vehicle registering authority of Excise
and Taxation Department shall collect advance tax at the time of registration of a new locally manufactured motor
vehicle, at the rates specified in Division VII of Part IV of the First Schedule:
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not be applicable in the case of –
(a) the Federal Government;
(b) the Provincial Government;
(c) the Local Government;
(d) a foreign diplomat; or
(e) a diplomatic mission in Pakistan.”
The word “private” omitted by the Finance Act, 2022.
Full-stop substituted by the Finance Act 2016.
Added by the Finance Act, 2016.
Added by the Finance Act, 2016.
Sub-section (1A) substituted by the Finance Act, 2017. The substituted sub-section (1A) read as
follows:
“ (1A) Every leasing company or a scheduled bank or an investment bank or a development
finance institution or a modaraba shall, at the time of leasing of a motor vehicle to a non-filer, collect
advance tax at the rate of three per cent of the value of the motor vehicle.”
The word “non-filer” substituted though Finance Act, 2019.
The word “private” omitted by the Finance Act, 2022.
Provided that no collection of advance tax under this sub-
section shall be made on transfer of vehicle after five year from the
date of first registration in Pakistan.
1[(2A) Every motor vehicle registration authority of Excise and Taxation
Department shall, at the time of registration, collect tax at the rates specified in
Division VII of Part IV of the First Schedule, if the locally manufactured motor
vehicle has been sold prior to registration by the person who originally purchased
it from the local manufacturer.]
(3) Every manufacturer of a motor 2[“vehicle”]shall collect, at the time of
sale of a motor car or jeep, advance tax at the rate specified in Division VII of Part
IV of the First Schedule from the person to whom such sale is made.
(4) Sub-section (1) shall not apply if a person produces evidence that tax
under sub-section (3) in case of a locally manufactured vehicle or tax under section
148 in the case of imported vehicle was collected from the same person in respect
of the same vehicle.
(5) The advance tax collected under this section shall be adjustable:
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not be applicable in
the case of –
(a) the Federal Government;
(b) a Provincial Government;
(c) a Local Government;
(d) a foreign diplomat; or
(e) a diplomatic mission in Pakistan.]
3[(6) For the purposes of this section the expression “date of first registration”
means—
(a) the date of issuance of broad arrow number in case a vehicle is
acquired from the Armed Forces of Pakistan;
(b) the date of registration by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in case the
vehicle is acquired from a foreign diplomat or a diplomatic mission in
Pakistan;
(c) the last day of the year of manufacture in case of acquisition of an
unregistered vehicle from the Federal or a Provincial Government;
and
Sub-section (2A) inserted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier sub-section (2A) was inserted through
Tax Laws (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
The word “car or jeep” substituted by the Finance Act, 2015.
Added by the Finance Act, 2015.
(d) in all other cases the date of first registration by the Excise and
Taxation Department.
1[(7) For the purpose of this section, motor vehicle includes car, caravan
automobiles, jeep, limousine, pickup, sports utility vehicle, trucks, vans, wagon and
any other automobile excluding–
(i) a motor vehicle used for public transportation, carriage of goods and
agriculture machinery;
(ii) a rickshaw or a motorcycle rickshaw and
(iii) any other motor vehicle having engine capacity upto 200cc.]
2[231C. Advance tax on foreign domestic workers. – (1) Any authority issuing
or renewing domestic aide visa to any foreign national as a domestic worker at the
time of issuing or renewing such visa shall collect from the agency, sponsor or the
person as the case may be, employing the services of such foreign national a tax
of two hundred thousand rupees.
(2) The tax collected or collectible under this section shall be adjustable
advance tax for the tax year to which it relates on the income of such agency,
sponsor or a person, as the case may be, employing the services of such foreign
national.]
3[ ]
Sub-section (7) substituted by the Finance Act, 2022. The substituted sub-section read as follows:
“(7) For the purpose of this section “motor vehicle” includes car, jeep, van, sports utility
vehicle, pick-up trucks for private use, caravan automobile, limousine, wagon and any other
automobile used for private purpose.
1[Explanation.--- For the removal of doubt, it is clarified that a motor vehicle does not include
a rickshaw, motorcycle-rickshaw and any other motor vehicle having engine capacity upto
200cc.”
Section 231C inserted by the Finance Act, 2023.
Omitted by the Finance Act, 2002. The omitted section 232 read as follows:
“232. Transfer of funds. - (1) Advance tax at the rate specified in Part-IV of the First Schedule shall
be collected by a person —
(a) clearing an outstation cheque of an amount excluding twenty-five thousand rupees;
(b) issuing a demand draft, pay order, special deposit receipts, cash deposit receipt or rupee
traveller’s cheque; and
(c) effecting a telegraphic or electronic transfer of funds, from the drawer of such cheque,
draft, pay order, receipt or person ordering transfer of funds.
(2) Advance tax under sub-section (1) shall not be collected in the case of payments made
by —
(a) Federal Government, Provincial Governments, statutory bodies and universities;
(b) a non-profit organization within the meaning of clause (37) of section 2;
(c) an industrial undertaking or institution exempt from tax under the Second Schedule;
(d) a public company whose shares are traded on a registered stock exchange in Pakistan;
1[233. Brokerage and commission. — (1) Where any payment on account of
brokerage or commission is made by the Federal Government, a Provincial
Government, a 2[Local Government], a company or an 3[association of person or
individual having turnover of hundred million rupees or more] (hereinafter called
the “principal”) to a 4[ ] person (hereinafter called the “agent”), the principal shall
deduct advance tax at the rate specified in 5[Division II of] Part IV of the First
Schedule from such payment.
(2) If the agent retains Commission or brokerage from any amount
remitted by him to the principal, he shall be deemed to have been paid the
commission or brokerage by the principal and the principal shall collect advance
tax from the agent.
6[(2A) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section (1), where the principal
is making payment on account of commission to an advertising agent, directly or
through electronic or print media, the principal shall deduct tax (in addition to tax
required to be deducted under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 153 on
advertising services excluding commission), at the rate specified in Division II of
Part IV of the First Schedule on the amount equal to-
A x 15
(e) a foreign diplomat or a foreign diplomatic mission in Pakistan;
(f) a branch or office of a company to another branch or office of such company;
(g) a person who holds National Tax Number and furnishes a statement to that bank in the
prescribed form and manner.”
Section 233 substituted by the Finance Act, 2005. The substituted section 233 read as follows:
“233. Brokerage and Commission.- (1) Where any payment on account of brokerage or
commission is made by the Federal Government, a Provincial Government, a local authority, a
company or an association of persons constituted by, or under, any law (hereinafter called the
“principal”) to any person B[other than travel agents and insurance agents] (hereinafter called the
“agent”), the principal shall deduct advance tax at the rate specified in Part IV of the First Schedule
from such payment.
(2) If the agent retains commission or brokerage from any amount remitted by him to the
principal, he shall be deemed to have been paid the commission or brokerage by the principal and
the principal shall collect advance tax from the agent.
(3) Where any payment on account of brokerage or commission is made by the principal
to a travel agent or an insurance agent, the principal shall deduct advance tax at the rate specified
in Part IV of the First Schedule from such payment.
(4) Where any tax is collected from a person under sub-section (1) or sub-section (3), the tax so
collected shall be the final tax on the income of such persons.”
The words “local authority” substituted by the Finance Act, 2008.
The expression “association of persons constituted by, or under any law” substituted by the Finance
Act, 2021.
The word “resident” omitted by the Finance Act, 2006.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2010.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2017.
Where A = amount paid or to be paid to electronic or print media for
advertising services (excluding commission) on which tax is
deductible under clause (b) of sub-section (I) of section 153.
(2B) Tax deducted under sub-section (2A) shall be 1[minimum] tax on the
income of the advertising agent.]
(3) Where any tax is 2[required to be] collected from a person under sub-
section (1), 3[such tax] shall be the 4[minimum] tax on the income of such persons.]
5[Explanation.— For the removal of doubt, it is explained that the income of
person referred to in sub-sections (2B) and (3) means the amount on which
tax is deductible under sub-sections (1) or (2A) of this section.]
6[ ]
7[ ]
8[ ]
9[ ]
The word “final” substituted through Finance Act, 2019.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2012.
The words “the tax so collected” substituted by the Finance Act, 2012.
The word “final” substituted through Finance Act, 2019.
Explanation added by the Finance (Supplementary) Act, 2022
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2004.
Section 233A omitted by the Finance Act, 2021. The omitted section read as follows:
“233A. Collection of tax by a stock exchange registered in Pakistan.— (1) A stock exchange
registered in Pakistan shall collect advance tax,—
(a) at the rates specified in Division IIA of Part IV of First Schedule from its Members
on purchase of shares in lieu of 7[tax on] the commission earned by such
Members; 7[and]
(b) at the rates specified in Division IIA of Part IV of First 7[Schedule] from its
Members on sale of shares in lieu of 7[tax on] the commission earned by such
Members7[.]
7[ ]
7[ ]
7[7[(2) The tax collected under sub-section (1) shall be 7[adjustable].]
7[(3) This section shall not apply from the first day of March. 2019.”
8 Inserted by the Finance Act, 2012.
Section 233AA omitted by the Finance Act, 2021. The omitted section read as follows:
“233AA. Collection of tax by NCCPL.—NCCPL shall collect advance tax from the members of
Stock Exchange registered in Pakistan 9[, margin financiers, trading financiers and lenders],in
respect of margin financing in share business 9[or providing of any margin financing, margin trading
or securities lending under Securities (Leveraged Markets and Pledging) Rules, 2011 in share
business] at the rate specified in Division 9[IIB] of Part IV of First Schedule9[:] ]
234. 1[Tax on motor vehicles].— (1) Any person 2[at the time of] collecting motor
vehicle tax shall also collect advance tax at the rates specified in 3[Division III of]
Part IV of the First Schedule.
(2) If the motor vehicle tax is collected in instalments4[or lump sum] the
advance tax may also be collected in instalments 5[or lump sum] in like manner.
6[(2A) In respect of motor cars used for more than ten years in Pakistan, no
advance tax shall be collected after a period of ten years.]
(3) In respect of a passenger transport vehicle with registered seating
capacity of ten or more persons, advance tax shall not be collected after a period
of ten years from the first day of July of the year of make of the vehicle.
(4) In respect of a goods transport vehicle with registered laden weight of
7[ ] less than 8120 kilograms, advance tax shall not be collected after a period of
ten years from the date of first registration of vehicle in Pakistan.
8[(5) Advance tax collected under this section shall be adjustable.]
9[“(6) For the purpose of sub-sections (1) and (2) “motor vehicle” shall
include the vehicles specified in sub-section (7) of section 231B.”]
10[ ]
11[ ]
9[Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any Mutual Fund
specified in sub-clause (2) of clause (57) of Part I of the Second Schedule.”
The words “Transport business” substituted by the Finance Act, 2008.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2002.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2013.
Comma substituted by the Finance Act, 2013.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2013.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2002.
The words “2030 kilogram or more but” omitted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Sub-section (5) substituted by the Finance Act, 2013. The substituted sub-section (5) read as
follows:
“(5) Where tax is collected from any person being the owner of goods transport vehicle, the
tax so collected shall be the final tax on the income of such person from plying, or hiring out, of
such vehicle.”
Added by the Finance Act, 2015.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2007.
Section 234A omitted by the Finance Act, 2021. The omitted section read as follows:
“234A CNG Stations.—(1) There shall be collected advance tax at the rate specified in Division VIB
of Part III of the First Schedule on the amount of gas bill of a Compressed Natural Gas station.
1[ ]
235. Electricity consumption.- (1) There shall be collected advance tax at the
rates specified in 2[Division IV of] Part-IV of the First Schedule on the amount of
electricity bill of a commercial or industrial 3[or domestic] consumer 4[:
Provided that the provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply to a domestic
consumer of electricity if his name appears on the Active Taxpayers’ List.]
5[ ]
6[ ]
(2) The person preparing electricity consumption bill shall charge
advance tax under sub-section (1) in the manner electricity consumption charges
are charged.
7[Explanation.— For removal of doubt, it is clarified that for the purposes
of this section electricity consumption bill referred to in sub-section (2) means
electricity bill inclusive of sales tax and all incidental charges.]
(3) Advance tax under this section shall not be collected from a person
who produces a certificate from the Commissioner that his income during tax year
(2) The person preparing gas consumption bill shall charge advance tax under sub-section (1)
in the manner gas consumption charges are charged.
(3) The tax collected under this section11[and under section 235] shall be a 11[minimum] tax on
the income of a CNG station arising from the consumption of the gas referred to in sub-section (1).
11[Explanation.— For removal of doubt, it is clarified that for the purposes of this section tax on
income arising from consumption of gas referred to in sub-section (3) means the tax collected under
sub-section (1) which is inclusive of sales tax and all incidental charges.]
Sub-section (4) omitted by the Finance Act, 2017. The omitted sub-section (4) is read as follows:
“(4) The taxpayers shall not be entitled to claim any adjustment of withholding tax collected
or deducted under any other head, during the tax year.”
2 Expression inserted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2021.
Full stop substituted and proviso added by the Finance Act, 2021.
Sub-section (1A) added by the Finance Act, 2022.
6 Sub-section (1A) omitted and deemed to have been so omitted from the 1st day of July, 2022 by the
Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 2023 (XVI of 2023) dated 20.04.2023. Earlier this sub-section was
omitted through Tax Laws (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 2022 (VI of 2022) dated 22.08.2022.
Omitted sub-section (1A) read as follows:
“(1A) In addition to tax collectible under sub-section (1), there shall be collected tax at the rates given
in the Division IV of Part IV of First Schedule from retailers and service providers as provided under
section 99A of the Ordinance:
Provided that the tax shall not be collectible under this sub-section if the tax has been collected
from the person under sub-section (9) of section 3 of the Sales Tax Act, 1990 as provided in the
general order issued under section 99A of the Ordinance.”
Added by Finance Act 2017.
is exempt from tax 1[or that he has discharged advance tax liability 2[under section
147 or whose entire income is subject to final tax regime or minimum tax regime
under any provisions of this Ordinance other than this section]. ]
3[(4) Under this section, —
(a) in the case of a taxpayer other than a company, tax collected upto
bill amount of 4[three hundred and sixty thousand Rupees per
annum]shall be treated as minimum tax on the income of such
persons and no refund shall be allowed;
(b) in the case of a taxpayer other than a company, tax collected on
monthly bill over and above thirty thousand rupees per month shall
be adjustable; and
5[(c)] in the case of a company, tax collected shall be adjustable against
tax liability.]
6[ ]
7[ ]
8[ ]
1 Expression inserted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
The words “for the tax year” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
Sub-section (4) substituted by the Finance Act, 2009. The substituted sub-section (4) read as follows:
“(4) The tax collected under this section up to bill amount of twenty thousand rupees per month
shall be minimum tax on the income of a person (other than a company). There shall be no refund
of the tax collected under this section, unless the tax so collected is in excess of the amount for
which the taxpayer is chargeable under this Ordinance in the case of a company.”
The word “thirty thousand rupees per month” substituted by the Finance Act 2017.
Clause (d) re-numbered by the Finance Act 2017.
Sections 235A and 235B inserted by the Finance Act, 2014.
Section 235A omitted by the Finance Act, 2021. The omitted section read as follows:
“235A. Domestic electricity consumption.- (1) There shall be collected advance tax at the rates
specified in Division XIX of Part IV of the First Schedule on the amount of electricity bill of a domestic
consumer.
7[Explanation.— For removal of doubt, it is clarified that for the purposes of this section,
electricity consumption bill referred to in sub-section (2) means electricity bill inclusive of sales tax and
all incidental charges.]
(2) The person preparing electricity consumption bill shall charge advance tax under sub-
section (1) in the manner electricity consumption charges are charged.
(3) Tax collected under this section shall be adjustable against tax liability.
8 Section 235B omitted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020 the omitted section read as
follows: 235B. Tax on steel melters 8[and composite units].- (1) There shall be collected tax from
every steel melter, 8[and] composite steel units, registered for the purpose of Chapter XI of Sales Tax
Special Procedure Rules, 2007 at the rate of one rupee per unit of electricity consumed for the
production of steel billets, ingots and mild steel (MS products) excluding stainless steel .
(2) The person preparing electricity consumption bill shall charge and collect the tax under
sub-section (1) in the manner electricity consumption charges are charged and collected.
236. Telephone 1[and internet] users.- (1) Advance tax at the rates specified in
2[Division V] Part IV of the First Schedule shall be collected on the amount of –
(a) telephone bill of a subscriber; 3[ ]
(b) prepaid cards for 4[ ] telephones 5[; 6[ ] ]
(c) sale of units through any electronic medium or whatever form
7[; and]
8[“(d) internet bill of a subscriber; and
(e) prepaid cards for internet.”]
(2) The person preparing the telephone9[or internet] bill shall charge
advance tax under sub-section (1) in the manner telephone10[or internet] charges
are charged.
(3) The person issuing or selling prepaid cards for 11[ ] telephones 12[or
internet] shall 13[collect] advance tax under sub-section (1) from the purchasers at
the time of issuance or sale of cards.
14[(3A) The person issuing or selling units through any electronic medium or
whatever form shall collect advance tax under sub-section (1) from the purchaser
at the time of issuance of sale of units.]
(3) The tax collected under sub- section (1) shall be deemed to be the tax required to be
deducted under sub-section (1) of section 153, on the payment for local purchase of scrap.
(4) Tax collected under sub-section (1) shall be non-adjustable and credit of the same shall
not be allowed to any person.]
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2015.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2021.
The word “and” omitted by the Finance Act, 2010.
The word “mobile“ omitted by the Finance Act, 2002.
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2010.
The word “and” omitted by Finance Act, 2015.
Substituted by the Finance Act, 2015
Added by the Finance Act, 2015.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2015.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2015.
The word “mobile” omitted by the Finance Act, 2002.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2015.
The word “called” substituted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Added by the Finance Act, 2010.
(4) Advance tax under this section shall not be collected from
Government, a foreign diplomat, a diplomatic mission in Pakistan, or a person who
produces a certificate from the Commissioner that his income during the tax year
is exempt from tax.
1[236A. Advance tax at the time of sale by auction.— (1) Any person making
sale by public auction2[or auction by a tender], of any property or goods 3[(including
property or goods confiscated or attached)] either belonging to or not belonging to
the Government, local Government, any authority, a company, a foreign
association declared to be a company under sub-clause (vi) of clause (b) of sub-
section (2) of section 80, or a foreign contractor or a consultant or a consortium or
Collector of Customs or Commissioner of 4[Inland Revenue] or any other authority,
shall collect advance tax, computed on the basis of sale price of such property and
at the rate specified in Division VIII of Part IV of the First Schedule, from the person
to whom such property or goods are being sold.
5[Explanation.--- For the removal of doubt it is clarified for the purpose of this
section that---
(a) the expression “sale by public auction or auction by a tender”
includes renewal of a license previously sold by public auction or
auction by a tender; and
(b) where payment is received in instalments, advance tax is to be
collected with each instalment.]
(2) The credit for the tax collected under sub-section (1) in that tax year
shall, subject to the provisions of section 147, be given in computing the tax
payable by the person purchasing such property in the relevant tax year or in the
case of a taxpayer to whom section 98B or section 145 applies, the tax year, in
which the “said date” as referred to in that section, falls or whichever is later.
Explanation.- For the purposes of this section, sale of any property includes
the awarding of any lease to any person, including a lease of the right to
collect tolls, fees or other levies, by whatever name called.]
6[(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section (2), tax collected on a
lease of the right to collect tolls shall be final tax.]
Added by the Finance Act, 2009.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2011.
The words “confiscated or attached” substituted by the Finance Act, 2010.
The words “Income Tax” substituted by the Finance Act, 2011.
5 Explanation added through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020.
Added by the Finance Act, 2016.
1[ ] 2[ ]
3[ ]
4[236C. Advance Tax on sale or transfer of immovable Property. — (1)
5[Subject to sub-section (2A), any person] responsible for registering 6[, recording]
or attesting transfer of any immovable property shall at the time of registering
7[,recording] or attesting the transfer shall collect from the seller or transferor
advance tax at the rate specified in Division X of Part IV of the First Schedule 8[:]
9[Explanation,—For removal of doubt, it is clarified that the person
responsible for registering, recording or attesting transfer includes person
responsible for registering, recording or attesting transfer for local authority,
housing authority, housing society, co-operative society 10[, public and
private real estate projects registered/governed under any law, joint
ventures, private commercial concerns] and registrar of properties.]
11[Provided that this sub-section shall not apply to a seller, being the dependant
of a Shaheed belonging to Pakistan Armed Forces or a person who dies while in the
service of the Pakistan Armed Forces or the service of Federal or Provincial Government
12[or a war wounded person while in service of Pakistan Armed Forces or Federal
or Provincial Government or an ex-serviceman and serving personnel of armed
Section 236B added by the Finance Act, 2010.
Sub-section (4) omitted by the Finance Act, 2015. The omitted sub-section (4) read as follows:-
[(4) The advance tax under this section shall not be collected in the case of—
(a) the Federal Government or a Provincial Government; or
(b) a person who produces a certificate from the Commissioner Inland Revenue that
income of such person during the tax year is exempt.]
Section 236B omitted by the Finance Act, 2021. The omitted section read as follows:
“236B. Advance tax on purchase of air ticket.— (1) There shall be collected advance tax at the
rate specified in Division IX of Part IV of the First Schedule, on the purchase of gross amount of
domestic air ticket3[“:”]
3[“Provided that this section shall not apply to routes of Baluchistan coastal belt, Azad Jammu
and Kashmir, Federally Administered Tribal Areas, Gilgit-Baltistan and Chitral.”]
(2) The 3[airline issuing] air ticket shall charge advance tax under sub-section (1) in the
manner air ticket charges are charged.]
3[(2A) The mode, manner and time of collection shall be as may be prescribed.]
3[(3) The advance tax collected under sub-section (1) shall be adjustable.]”
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2012.
The words “Any person” substituted by the Finance Act, 2023.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2017.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2017.
Full stop substituted by the Presidential Order No.F.2(1)/2016-Pub dated 31.08.2016.
Added by the Finance Act, 2017.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2021.
Added by the Presidential Order No.F.2(1)/2016-Pub dated 31.08.2016.
Expression inserted by the Finance Act, 2024.
forces or ex-employees or serving personnel of Federal and Provincial
Government], in respect of first sale of immovable property acquired from or allotted by
the Federal Government or Provincial Government or any authority duly certified by the
official allotment authority, and the property acquired or allotted is in recognition of or for
services rendered by the Shaheed or the person who dies in service 1[or a war
wounded person while in service of Pakistan Armed Forces or Federal or
Provincial Government or an ex-serviceman and serving personnel of armed
forces or ex-employees or serving personnel of Federal and Provincial
Government] ] 2[:
[Provided further that if the seller or transferor is a non-resident individual holding
Pakistan Origin Card (POC) or National ID Card for Overseas Pakistanis (NICOP) or
Computerized National ID Card (CNIC) who had acquired the said immovable property
through a Foreign Currency Value Account (FCVA) or NRP Rupee Value Account
(NRVA) maintained with authorized banks in Pakistan under the foreign exchange
regulations issued by the State Bank of Pakistan, the tax collected under this section
from such persons shall be final discharge of tax liability in lieu of capital gains taxable
under section 37 earned by the seller or transferor from the property so disposed of.]
(2) The Advance tax collected under sub-section (1) shall be adjustable
3[:]
4[Provided that where immovable property referred to in sub-
section (1) is acquired and disposed of within the same tax year, the
tax collected under this section shall be minimum tax.]
5[(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, for the time
being in force, any person responsible for registering, recording or attesting
transfer of any immovable property shall not register, record or attest transfer
unless the seller or transferor has discharged its tax liability under section 7E and
evidence to this effect has been furnished to the said person in the prescribed
mode, form and manner.”; ]
6[ ]
Expression inserted by the Finance Act, 2024.
Full stop substituted and proviso added by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier this substitution and addition
were made through Tax Laws (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2017
inserted by the Finance Act, 2017
Sub-section (2A) inserted by the Finance Act, 2023.
Sub-section (3) omitted by the Finance Act 2015. The omitted sub-section read as follows:
“(3) The advance tax under this section shall not be collected in the case of Federal
Government, Provincial Government or a Local Government.”
1[ ]
2[ ]
3[ ]
4[(4) Sub-section (1) shall not apply to:—
(a) a seller, if the seller is dependent of:
(i) a seller, if the seller is dependent of:
a Shaheed belonging to Pakistan Armed Forces; or
(ii) a person who dies while in the service of the Pakistan
Armed Forces or the Federal and Provincial
Governments; and
(b) to the first sale of immovable property which has been acquired
or allotted as an original allottee, duly certified by the official
allotment authority.]
5[236CA. Advance tax on TV plays and advertisements.- (1) Any licensing
authority certifying any foreign TV drama serial or a play dubbed in Urdu or any
other language, for screening and viewing on any landing rights channel, shall
collect advance tax at the rates specified in Division XA of Part IV of the First
Schedule.
(2) Any licensing authority certifying any commercial for advertisement
starring foreign actor, for screening and viewing on any landing rights channel shall
collect advance tax at the rates specified in Division XA of Part IV of the First
Schedule.
Added by the Finance Act, 2016.
Sub-section (3) omitted by the Finance Act, 2022. The omitted sub-section read as follows:
“(3) Advance tax under sub-section (1) shall not be collected if the immovable property is held for a
period exceeding 2[four] years.”
Sub-section (4) omitted by the Presidential Order No.F.2(1)/2016-Pub dated 31.08.2016. The omitted
sub-section read as follows:-
“(4) Sub-section (1) shall not apply to:—
(a) a seller, if the seller is dependent of:
(i) a Shaheed belonging to Pakistan Armed Forces; or
(ii) a person who dies while in the service of the Pakistan Armed Forces or the Federal and
Provincial Governments; and
(b) to the first sale of immovable property which has been acquired or allotted as an original
allottee, duly certified by the official allotment authority."]
Sub-section (4) added by the Income Tax (Fourth Amendment) Act, 2016 dated 02.12.2016.
Section 236CA inserted by the Finance (Supplementary) Act, 2022.
(3) The tax required to be collected under this section shall be minimum
tax in respect of income arising from such drama serial or play or advertisement
referred to in sub-section (1) or (2) of this section.]
1[236CB. Advance tax on functions and gatherings. – (1) Every prescribed
person shall collect advance tax at the rate specified in Division Xl of Part IV of the
First Schedule on the total amount of the bill from a person arranging or holding a
function in a marriage hall, marquee, hotel, restaurant, commercial lawn, club, a
community place or any other place used for such purpose, subject to such
conditions or limitations as may be prescribed.
(2) Where the food, service or any other facility is provided by any other
person, the prescribed person shall also collect advance tax on the payment for
such food, service or facility at the rate specified in Division Xl of Part IV of the First
Schedule from the person arranging or holding the function.
(3) The advance tax collected under sub-section (1) and subsection (2)
shall be adjustable.
(4) ln this section –
(a) "function" includes any wedding related event, a seminar, a
workshop, a session, an exhibition, a concert, a show, a party or
any other gathering held for such purpose; and
(b) "prescribed person" includes the owner, a lease-holder, an
operator or a manager of a marriage hall, marquee, hotel,
restaurant, commercial lawn, club, a community place or any
other place used for such purpose.]
2[ ]
1 Section 236CB inserted by the Finance (Supplementary) Act, 2023 (X of 2023) dated 23.02.2023.
2 Section 236D and 236F omitted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020 the omitted sections
read as follows: 236D. Advance tax on functions and gatherings.— (1) Every prescribed person
shall collect advance tax at the rate specified in Division XI of Part IV of the First Schedule on the total
amount of the bill from a person arranging or holding a function in a marriage hall, marquee, hotel,
restaurant, commercial lawn, club, a community place or any other place used for such purpose.
(2) Where the food, service or any other facility is provided by any other person, the prescribed
person shall also collect advance tax on the payment for such food, service or facility at the rate
specified in Division XI of Part IV of the First Schedule from the person arranging or holding the function.
(3) The advance tax collected under sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) shall be adjustable.
(4) In this section,—
(a) “function” includes any wedding related event, a seminar, a workshop, a session, an exhibition,
a concert, a show, a party or any other gathering held for such purpose; and
(b) “prescribed person” includes the owner, a lease-holder, an operator or a manager of a marriage
hall, marquee, hotel, restaurant, commercial lawn, club, a community place or any other place
used for such purpose.]
2[ 2[ ] ]
2[236F. Advance tax on cable operators and other electronic media.— (1) Pakistan Electronic
Media Regulatory Authority, at the time of issuance of licence for distribution services or renewal of the
licence to a licencee, shall collect advance tax at the rates specified in Division XIII of Part IV of the
First Schedule.
(2) The tax collected under sub-section (1) shall be adjustable.
1[236G. Advance tax on sales to distributors, dealers and wholesalers.— (1)
Every manufacturer or commercial importer 2[ ] at the time of sale to distributors,
dealers and wholesalers, shall collect advance tax at the rate specified in Division
XIV of Part IV of the First Schedule, from the aforesaid person to whom such sales
have been made.
(2) Credit for tax collected under sub-section (1) shall be allowed in
computing the tax due by the distributor, dealer or wholesaler on the taxable
income for the tax year in which the tax was collected.]
3[236H. Advance tax on sales to retailers.— (1) Every manufacturer, distributor,
dealer, wholesaler or commercial importer 4[ ] at the time of sale to retailers5[“, and
every distributor or dealer to another wholesaler in respect of the said sectors”],
shall collect advance tax at the rate specified in Division XV of Part IV of the First
Schedule, from the aforesaid person to whom such sales have been made.
(2) Credit for the tax collected under sub-section (1) shall be allowed in
computing the tax due by the retailer on the taxable income for the tax year in
which the tax was collected.]
6[ ]
7[ ]
(3) For the purpose of this section, “cable television operator” “DTH”, “Distribution Service”, “electronic
media”, “IPTV”, “loop holder”, “MMDS”, “mobile TV”, shall have the same meanings as defined in
Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority Ordinance, 2002 (XIII of 2002) and rules made
thereunder
Added by the Finance Act, 2013.
2 The expression “of 2[pharmaceuticals, poultry and animal feed, edible oil and ghee, auto-parts, tyres,
varnishes, chemicals, cosmetics, IT equipment,] electronics, sugar, cement, iron and steel products,
fertilizer, motorcycles, pesticides, cigarettes, glass, textile, beverages, paint or foam sector,” omitted
by the Finance Act, 2024.
Added by the Finance Act, 2013.
4 The expression “of 4[pharmaceuticals, poultry and animal feed, edible oil and ghee, auto-parts, tyres,
varnishes, chemicals, cosmetics, IT equipment,] electronics, sugar, cement, iron and steel products,
4[ ]motorcycles, pesticides, cigarettes, glass, textile, beverages, paint or foam sector,” omitted by
the Finance Act, 2024.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2015.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2018
Section 236HA omitted by the Finance Act, 2021. The omitted section read as follows:
“236HA. Tax on sale of certain petroleum products.— (1) Every person selling petroleum
products to a petrol pump operator or distributer, where such operator or distributer is not allowed a
commission or discount, shall collect advance tax on ex-depot sale price of such products at the rate
specified in Division XVA of Part IV of the First schedule.
(2) The tax deductible under sub-section (1) shall be a final tax on the income arising from the sale
of petroleum products to which sub-section (1) applies.]”
1[ ]
2[ ]
3[ ]
4[236K. Advance tax on purchase or transfer of immovable property.—(1) Any
person responsible for registering 5[,recording] or attesting transfer of any
immovable property shall at the time of registering 6[,recording] or attesting the
transfer shall collect from the purchaser or transferee advance tax at the rate
specified in Division XVIII of Part IV of the First Schedule.
7[Explanation,—For removal of doubt, it is clarified that the person
responsible for registering, recording or attesting transfer includes person
responsible for registering, recording or attesting transfer for local authority,
housing authority, housing society, co-operative society 8[, public and private
Added by the Finance Act, 2013.
Section 236I omitted by the Finance Act, 2022. The omitted section read as follows:
“236I. Collection of advance tax by educational institutions.— (1) There shall be collected
advance tax 2[from a person not appearing on the active taxpayers’ list] at the rate specified in
Division XVI of Part-IV of the First Schedule on the amount of fee paid to an educational institution.
(2) The person preparing fee voucher or challan shall charge advance tax under sub-
section (1) in the manner the fee is charged.
(3) Advance tax under this section shall not be collected from a person 2[on an amount
which is paid by way of scholarship or] where annual fee does not exceed two hundred thousand
rupees.
(4) The term “fee” includes, tuition fee and all charges received by the educational
institution, by whatever name called, excluding the amount which is refundable.
(4) Tax collected under this section shall be adjustable against the tax liability of either of
the parents or guardian making payment of the fee.]
2[“(6) Advance tax under this section shall not be collected from a person who is a non-
resident and,—
(i) furnishes copy of passport as an evidence to the educational institution that during previous
tax year, his stay in Pakistan was less than one hundred eighty-three days;
(ii) furnishes a certificate that he has no Pakistan-source income; and
(iii) the fee is remitted directly from abroad through normal banking channels to the bank
account of the educational institution.”
3 The section 236J omitted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020 the omitted section read
as follows:
“236J. Advance tax on dealers, commission agents and arhatis etc.— (1) Every market committee
shall collect advance tax from dealers, commission agents or arhatis, etc. at the rates specified in
Division XVII of Part-IV of the First Schedule at the time of issuance or renewal of licences.
(2) The advance tax collected under sub-section (1) shall be adjustable.
(4) In this section “market committee” includes any committee or body formed under any
provincial or local law made for the purposes of establishing, regulating or organizing
agricultural, livestock and other commodity markets.”
Sections 236K, 236L, 236M and 236N inserted by the Finance Act, 2014.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2017.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2017.
Added by the Finance Act, 2017
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2021.
real estate projects registered/governed under any law, joint ventures,
private commercial concerns] and registrar of properties.]
(2) The advance tax collected under sub-section (1) shall be adjustable
1[:
Provided that if the buyer or transferee is a non-resident individual
holding a Pakistan Origin Card (POC) or National ID Card for Overseas
Pakistanis (NICOP) or Computerized National ID Card (CNIC) who has
acquired the said immovable property through a Foreign Currency Value
Account (FCVA) or NRP Rupee Value Account (NRVA) maintained with
authorized banks in Pakistan under the foreign exchange regulations issued
by the State Bank of Pakistan, the tax collected under this section from such
persons shall be final discharge of tax liability for such buyer or transferee.]
2[ ]
3[(3) Any person responsible for collecting payments in installments for
purchase or allotment of any immovable property where the transfer is to be
effected after making payment of all installments, shall at the time of collecting
installments collect from the allotee or transferee advance tax at the rate specified
in Division XVIII of Part IV of the First Schedule] 4[:
Provided that where tax has been collected along with installments,
no further tax under this section shall be collected at the time of transfer of
property in the name of buyer from whom tax has been collected in
installments which is equal to the amount payable in this section.]
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to a scheme introduced
by the Federal Government, or Provincial Government or an Authority established
under a Federal or Provincial law for expatriate Pakistanis5[:]
6[“Provided that the mode of payment by the expatriate Pakistanis in
the said scheme or schemes shall be in the foreign exchange remitted from
outside Pakistan through normal banking channels.”]
Full stop substituted and proviso added by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier this substitution and
addition were made through Tax Laws (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
Sub-section (3) omitted by the Finance Act, 2015. The omitted sub-section (3) read as follows:-
“(3) The advance tax under this section shall not be collected in the case of the Federal
Government, a Provincial Government, a Local Government or a foreign diplomatic
mission in Pakistan.”
Sub-section (3) inserted by the Finance Act, 2018.
Full stop substituted and proviso added by the Finance Act, 2021.
Full stop substituted by the finance Act, 2015.
Added by the Finance Act, 2015.
1[ ]
2[ ]
3[ ]
Section 236L omitted by the Finance Act, 2021. The omitted section read as follows:
236L. Advance tax on purchase of international air ticket.— (1) Every airline, issuing ticket for
journey originating from Pakistan, shall collect advance tax at the rates specified in Division XX of
Part IV of the First Schedule, on the gross amount of international air tickets issued to passengers
booking one-way or return, from Pakistan.
(2) The airline issuing air ticket shall collect or charge advance tax under sub-section (1) in
the manner air ticket charges are collected or charged, either manually or electronically.
(3) The mode, manner and time of collection under sub-section (1) and time of collection
shall be as may be prescribed.
(4) The advance tax collected under sub-section (1) shall be adjustable.”
Section 236M omitted by the Finance Act, 2018. The omitted section 236M read as follows:
“236M. Bonus shares issued by companies quoted on stock exchange .- (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in any law for the time being in force, every company, quoted on stock exchange,
issuing bonus shares to the shareholders of the company, shall withhold five percent of the bonus
shares to be issued.
(2) Bonus shares withheld under sub-section (1) shall only be issued to a shareholder, if the
company collects from the shareholder, tax equal to five percent of the value of the bonus
shares issued to the shareholder including bonus share withheld, determined on the basis of
day-end price on the first day of closure of books.
(3) Tax under sub-section (2), shall be collected by the company, within fifteen days of the first
day of closure of books.
(4) If the shareholder fails to make the payment of tax under sub-section (2) within fifteen days
or the company fails to collect the said tax within fifteen days, the company shall deposit the
bonus share withheld under sub-section (1) in the Central Depository Company of Pakistan
Limited or any other entity as may be prescribed.
(5) Bonus share deposited in the Central Depository Company of Pakistan Limited or the entity
prescribed under sub-section (4) shall be disposed of in the mode and manner as may be
prescribed and the proceeds thereof shall be paid to the Commissioner, by way of credit to
the Federal Government.
(6) Issuance of bonus shares shall be deemed to be the income of the shareholder and the tax
collected by a company under sub-section (2) or proceeds of the bonus shares disposed of
and paid under sub-section (5) shall be treated to have been paid on behalf of shareholder.
(7) Tax paid under this section shall be final tax on the income of the shareholder of the company
arising from issuing of bonus shares.”
3Section 236N omitted by the Finance Act, 2018. The omitted section 236N read as follows:
“236N. Bonus shares issued by companies not quoted on stock exchange .- (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in any law for the time being in force, every company, not quoted on stock
exchange, issuing bonus shares to the shareholders of the company, shall deposit tax, within
fifteen days of the closure of books, at the rate of five percent of the value of the bonus shares
on the first day of closure of books, whether or not tax has been collected by the company
under sub-section (3).
(2) Issuance of bonus shares shall be deemed to be the income of the shareholder and tax
deposited under sub-section (1) shall be treated to have been deposited on behalf of the
shareholder.
(3) A company liable to deposit tax under sub-section (1), shall be entitled to collect and recover
the tax deposited under sub-section (1),from the shareholder, on whose behalf the tax has
been deposited, before the issuance of bonus shares.
(4) If a shareholder neither makes payment of tax to the company nor collects its bonus shares,
within three months of the date of issuance of bonus shares, the company may proceed to
dispose of its bonus shares to the extent it has paid tax on its behalf under sub-section (1).
1[236O. Advance tax under this chapter.—The advance tax under this chapter
shall not be collected 2[“or deducted from”] —
(a) the Federal Government or a Provincial Government;
(b) a foreign diplomat or a diplomatic mission in Pakistan; or
(c) a person who produces a certificate from the Commissioner that
his income during the tax year is exempt.”]
3[ ]
4[ ]
5[ ]
6[ ]
(5) Tax paid under this section shall be a final tax on the income of the shareholder of the
company arising from issuance of bonus shares.
(6) The Board may prescribe rules for determination of value of shares under sub-section (1).]”
Section “236O” inserted by the Finance Act, 2015.
The words “in the case of withdrawals made by” substituted by the Finance Act, 2016.
Section “236P” inserted by the Finance Act, 2015.
Section 236P omitted by the Finance Act, 2021. The omitted section read as follows:
“236P. Advance tax on banking transactions otherwise than through cash.— (1) Every banking
company shall collect advance adjustable tax from a 4[person whose name is not appearing in the
active taxpayers’ list] at the time of sale of any instrument, including demand draft, pay order, special
deposit receipt, cash deposit receipt, short term deposit receipt, call deposit receipt, rupee traveller‘s
cheque or any other instrument of such nature.
(2) Every banking company shall collect advance adjustable tax from a 4[ person whose name
is not appearing in the active taxpayers’ list] at the time of transfer of any sum through cheque or
clearing, interbank or intra bank transfers through cheques, online transfer, telegraphic transfer, mail
transfer, direct debit, payments through internet, payments through mobile phones, account to account
funds transfer, third party account to account funds transfers, real time account to account funds
transfer, real time third party account to account fund transfer, automated teller machine (ATM)
transfers, or any other mode of electronic or paper based funds transfer.
(3) The advance tax under this section shall be collected at the rate specified in Division XXI of
Part IV of the First Schedule, where the sum total of payments for all transactions mentioned in sub-
section (1) or subsection (2), as the case may be, exceed fifty thousand rupees in a day.
4[“Explanation.- For removal of doubt, it is clarified that the said fifty thousand rupees shall be
aggregate transfers from all the bank accounts in a single day.”]
(4) Advance tax under this section shall not be collected in the case of 4[ ] payments made for
Federal, Provincial or local Government taxes.”]”
Section “236Q” inserted by the Finance Act, 2015.
Section “236Q” omitted by the Finance Act, 2022. The omitted section read as follows:
“236Q. Payment to residents for use of machinery and equipment.—(1) Every prescribed
person making a payment in full or in part including a payment by way of advance to a resident person
for use or right to use industrial, commercial and scientific equipment shall deduct tax from the gross
amount at the rate specified in Division XXIII of Part IV of the First Schedule.
(2) Every prescribed person making a payment in full or in part including a payment by way of
advance to a resident person on account of rent of machinery shall deduct tax from the gross amount
at the rate specified in Division XXIII of Part IV of the First Schedule.
(3) The tax deductible under sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be 6[minimum] tax on the income
of such resident person.
1[ ]
2[ ]
3[ ]
4[ 5[ ] ]
6[ ]
[Explanation.— For the removal of doubt, it is explained that the income of person referred to
in sub-section (3) means the amount on which tax is deductible under sub-section (1) or (2) of this
section.]
(4) In this section ―prescribed person‖ means a prescribed person as defined in sub-section
(7) of section 153.
(5) The provisions of sub-section (1) and (2) shall not apply to—
(a) agricultural machinery; and
(b) machinery leased by a leasing company, an investment bank or a modaraba or a
scheduled bank or a development finance institution in respect of assets owned by the
leasing company or an investment bank or a modaraba or a scheduled bank or a
development finance institution.”
1 Section “236R” omitted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020 the omitted section read as
follows: “236R. Collection of advance tax on education related expenses remitted abroad.―(1)
There shall be collected advance tax at the rate specified in Division XXIIV of Part-IV of the First
Schedule on the amount of education related expenses remitted abroad.
(2) Banks, financial institutions, foreign exchange companies or any other person responsible
for remitting foreign currency abroad shall collect advance tax from the payer of education related
expenses.
(3) Tax collected under this section shall be adjustable against the income of the person
remitting payment of education related expenses.
(4) For the purpose of this section, “education related expenses” includes tuition fee, boarding
and lodging expenses, any payment for distant learning to any institution or university in a foreign
country and any other expense related or attributable to foreign education.”
Section “236S” inserted by the Finance Act, 2015.
Section 236S omitted by the Finance Act, 2021. The omitted section read as follows:
“236S. Dividend in specie.—Every person making payment of dividend-in-specie shall collect tax
from the gross amount of the dividend in specie paid at the rate specified in Division I of Part III of the
First Schedule.”]
Section “236T” inserted by the Finance Act, 2015.
Section “236T” omitted by the Finance Act, 2016. Omitted section read as follows:-
“236T. Collection of tax by Pakistan Mercantile Exchange Limited (PMEX).—(1) Pakistan
Mercantile Exchange Limited (PMEX) shall collect advance tax—
(a) at the rates specified in Division XXII of Part IV of First Schedule from its members on
purchase of futures commodity contracts;
(b) at the rates specified in Division XXII of Part IV of First Schedule from its members on sale
of futures commodity contracts; and
(2) The tax collected under clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1) shall be an adjustable
tax.”]
6 Section 236U omitted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020 the omitted section read as
follows: “236U. Advance tax on insurance premium.- (1) Every insurance company shall collect
advance tax at the time of collection of insurance premium from 6[person whose name is not appearing
in the active taxpayers’ list] in respect of general insurance premium and life insurance premium, at the
rates specified in Division XXV of Part IV of the First Schedule.
(2) Insurance premium collected through agents of the insurance company shall be treated to have
been collected by the insurance company.
1[ ]
2[ ]
3[ ]
4[ ]
5[ ]
6[ ]
(3) Advance tax collected under this section shall be adjustable.”
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2016.
Section 236V omitted by the Finance Act, 2021. The omitted section read as follows:
“236V. Advance tax on extraction of minerals.- (1) There shall be collected advance tax at the
rate specified in Division XXVI of Part-IV of the First Schedule on the value of minerals extracted,
produced, despatched and carried away from the licensed or leased areas of the mines.
(2) Advance tax under sub-section (1) shall be collected by the provincial authority
collecting royalty per metric ton from the lease-holder of mines or any person extracting minerals.
(3) Advance tax collected under this section shall be adjustable.
(4) The value of the minerals for the purpose of this section shall be as specified by the
Board.”]”
Section 236W omitted through Finance Act, 2019, omitted section read as follow:
236W. Tax on purchase or transfer of immovable property.—(1) Every person responsible for
registering3[,recording] or attesting transfer of any immovable property shall at the time of registering
3[,recording] or attesting the transfer shall collect from the purchaser or transferee advance tax at the
rate of three per cent of the amount computed under clause (c) of sub-section (4) of section 111.
3[Explanation,—For removal of doubt, it is clarified that the person responsible for
registering, recording or attesting transfer includes person responsible for registering, recording
or attesting transfer for local authority, housing authority, housing society, co-operative society
and registrar of properties.]
2. Tax collected under sub-section (1) shall not be adjustable.
4 Section 236X omitted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020 omitted section read as
follows: “236X. Advance tax on tobacco.— (1)Pakistan Tobacco Board or its contractors, at the time
of collecting cess on tobacco, directly or indirectly, shall collect advance tax at the rate of five percent
of the purchase value of tobacco from every person purchasing tobacco including manufacturers of
cigarettes.
(2) Tax collected under this section shall be adjustable.”
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2018.
Section 236Y omitted by the Finance Act, 2021. The omitted section read as follows:
236Y. Advance tax on persons remitting amounts abroad through credit or debit or prepaid
cards.—(1) Every banking company shall collect advance tax, at the time of transfer of any sum
remitted outside Pakistan, on behalf of any person who has completed a credit card transaction, a debit
card transaction, or a prepaid card transaction with a person outside Pakistan at the rate specified
in Division XXVII of Part IV of the First Schedule.
(2) The advance tax collected under this section shall be adjustable."]”
1[236Y. Advance tax on persons remitting amounts abroad through credit
or debit or prepaid cards.— (1) Every banking company shall collect advance
tax, at the time of transfer of any sum remitted outside Pakistan, on behalf of any
person who has completed a credit card or debit card or prepaid card transaction
with a person outside Pakistan at the rate specified in Division XXVII of Part IV
of the First Schedule.
(2) The advance tax collected under this section shall be adjustable.]
2[236Z. Bonus shares issued by companies. – (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in any law for the time being in force, every company, issuing bonus
shares to the shareholders of the company, shall withhold ten percent of the bonus
shares to be issued.
(2) Bonus shares withheld under sub-section (1) shall only be issued to a
shareholder, if the company collects from the shareholder, tax equal to ten percent
of the value of the bonus shares issued to the shareholder including bonus share
withheld, determined on the basis of day-end price on the first day of closure of
books in the case of listed company and the value as prescribed in case of other
companies.
(3) Tax under sub-section (2), shall be deposited by the company, within
fifteen days of closure of books, whether or not tax has been collected by the
company under subsection (2).
(4) A company liable to deposit tax under this section shall be entitled to
collect and recover the tax deposited from the shareholder, on whose behalf the
tax has been deposited, before the issuance of bonus shares.
(5) If a shareholder neither makes payment of tax to the company nor
collects its bonus shares, within fifteen days of the date of issuance of bonus
shares, the company may proceed to dispose of its bonus shares to the extent it
has paid tax on its behalf under this section.
(6) Issuance of bonus shares shall be deemed to be the income of the
shareholder and the tax collected by a company under this section or proceeds of
the bonus shares disposed of and paid under this section shall be treated to have
been paid on behalf of the shareholder.
(7) Tax paid under this section shall be final tax on the income of the
shareholder of the company arising from issuing of bonus shares.]
Section 236Y inserted by the Finance Act, 2022.
Section 236Z inserted by the Finance Act, 2023.
