PART IV
COLLECTION AND RECOVERY OF TAX
137. Due date for payment of tax.— (1) The tax payable by a taxpayer on the
taxable income of the taxpayer 1[including the tax payable under 2[ ] ] 3[section
4[113 or] 113A] for a tax year shall be due on the due date for furnishing the
taxpayer’s return of income for that year.
5[(2) Where any tax is payable under an assessment order or an amended
assessment order or any other order issued by the Commissioner under this
Ordinance, a notice shall be served upon the taxpayer in the prescribed form
specifying the amount payable and thereupon the sum so specified shall be paid
within 6[ 7[thirty] ] days from the date of service of the notice 8[:] 9[ ]
10[Provided that the due date for payment of tax payable under sub- section
(7) of section 147 shall be the date specified in sub-section (5) or sub-section (5A)
or first proviso to sub-section (5B) of section 147.]
11[ 12[ ] ]
13[ 14[ ] ]
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003. Earlier this was inserted by S.R.O. 633(I)/2002, dated 14.09.2002
which stands rescinded by SRO 608(I)/2003, dated 24.06.2003 with effect from 01.07.2003.
The words and figure “section 113 or” omitted by the Finance Act, 2008.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2004.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2009.
Substituted by the Finance Act, 2003. The substituted sub-section (2) read as follows:
“(2) Where an assessment order or amended assessment order is issued by the
Commissioner, the tax payable under the order shall be payable within fifteen days from the date of
the assessment order is issued. “
The word “thirty” substituted by the Finance Act, 2008.
The word “fifteen” substituted by the Finance Act, 2015.
8 Full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2018
Colon substituted by the Finance Act, 2017.
Added by the Finance Act, 2018.
Added by the Finance Act, 2010.
Proviso omitted by the Finance Act, 2017. The omitted provision read as follows:
“Provided that the tax payable as a result of provisional assessment order under section 122C,
as specified in the notice under sub-section (2) shall be payable immediately after a period of forty-
five days from the date of service of the notice”
Added by the Finance Act, 2012.
Proviso omitted by the Finance Act, 2017. The omitted provision read as follows:
“Provided further that the taxpayer may pay the tax payable prior to expiry of the period of forty-
five days specified in the first proviso.”
(3) Nothing in sub-section (2) 1[or (4)] shall affect the operation of sub-
section (1).
(4) Upon written application by a taxpayer, the Commissioner may, where
good cause is shown, grant the taxpayer an extension of time for payment of tax
due 2[under sub-section (2)] or allow the taxpayer to pay 3[such tax] in instalments
of equal or varying amounts as the Commissioner may determine having regard
to the circumstances of the case.
(5) Where a taxpayer is permitted to pay tax by instalments and the
taxpayer defaults in payment of any instalments, the whole balance of the tax
outstanding shall become immediately payable.
(6) The grant of an extension of time to pay tax due or the grant of
permission to pay tax due by instalments shall not preclude the liability for 4[default
surcharge] arising under section 205 from the due date of the tax under sub-
section 5[(2)].
6[ ]
7[138. Recovery of tax out of property and through arrest of taxpayer.— (1)
For the purpose of recovering any tax due by a taxpayer, the Commissioner may
serve upon the taxpayer a notice in the prescribed form requiring him to pay the
said amount within such time as may be specified in the notice.
(2) If the amount referred to in the notice issued under sub-section (1) is
not paid within the time specified therein or within the further time, if any, allowed
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003. Earlier this was inserted by S.R.O. 633(I)/2002, dated 14.09.2002
which stands rescinded by SRO 608(I)/2003, dated 24.06.2003 with effect from 01.07.2003.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
The words “any tax due” substituted by the Finance Act, 2003.
The word s “additional tax” substituted by the Finance Act, 2010.
The brackets and figure “(1)” substituted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Sub-section (7) omitted by the Finance Act, 2002. The omitted sub-section (7) read as under:
“(7) A taxpayer dissatisfied with a decision under sub-section (4) may challenge the decision
only under Part III of this Chapter.”
Section 138 substituted by Finance Act, 2002. The substituted section 138 read as follows:
“138. Tax as a debt due to the Federal Government.- (1) Any tax due under this Ordinance by a
taxpayer shall be a debt due to the Federal Government and shall be payable in the manner and at
the place prescribed.
(2) Any tax that has not been paid by the due date may be sued for and recovered in any
court of competent jurisdiction by the Commissioner acting in the Commissioner’s official name.
(3) In any suit under sub-section (2), the production of a certificate signed by the
Commissioner stating the name and address of the taxpayer and the amount of tax due shall be
conclusive evidence of the amount of tax due by such taxpayer.”
by the Commissioner, the Commissioner may proceed to recover from the
taxpayer the said amount by one or more of the following modes, namely:—
(a) attachment and sale of any movable or immovable property of
the taxpayer;
(b) appointment of a receiver for the management of the movable
or immovable property of the taxpayer; 1[ ]
(c) arrest of the taxpayer and his detention in prison for a period not
exceeding six months 2[; and
(d) as specified under clauses (a), (ca) and (d) of sub-section (I) of
section 48 of the Sales Tax Act, 1990.]
(3) For the purposes of recovery of tax under sub-section (2), the
Commissioner shall have the same powers as a Civil Court has under the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act V of 1908), for the purposes of the recovery of any
amount due under a decree.
3[(3A) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Ordinance or any other law
or any rule, any decision or judgment of any court, forum or authority, the tax
payable under any provision of this Ordinance or any assessment order shall
become immediately payable subject to the following conditions —
(a) that the case has been decided in the favor of the department at three
appellate forums including the High Court;
(b) that the recovery under this section shall only be made to the extent
of lowest amount of demand which has been confirmed by any of the
three appellate forums; and
(c) that the tax payable exceeds rupees two hundred million,
and the Commissioner shall proceed to recover the said amount irrespective of the
time provided under any other provision or the said decision or judgment.]
(4) The 4[Board] may make rules regulating the procedure for the
recovery of tax under this section and any other matter connected with, or
incidental to, the operation of this section.]
1 The word “and” omitted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
Full stop substituted by “semi colon” and the word “and” thereafter new clause (d) added through
Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
Sub-section (3A) inserted by the Finance Act, 2025.
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
1[138A. Recovery of tax by District Officer (Revenue).— (1) The Commissioner
may forward to the District Officer (Revenue) of the district in which the taxpayer
resides or carries on business or in which any property belonging to the taxpayer
is situated, a certificate specifying the amount of any tax due from the taxpayer,
and, on receipt of such certificate, the District Officer (Revenue) shall proceed to
recover from the taxpayer the amount so specified as, it were an arrear of land
revenue.
(2) Without prejudice to any other power of the District Officer (Revenue)
in this behalf, he shall have the same powers as a Civil Court has under the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act V of 1908), for the purpose of the recovery of the
amount due under a decree.]
2[138B. Estate in bankruptcy.—(1) If a taxpayer is declared bankrupt, the tax
liability under this Ordinance shall pass on to the estate in bankruptcy.
(2) If tax liability is incurred by an estate in bankruptcy, the tax shall be
deemed to be a current expenditure in the operations of the estate in bankruptcy
and shall be paid before the claims preferred by other creditors are settled.]
139. Collection of tax in the case of private companies and associations of
persons.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in the 3[Companies Act, 2017 (XIX of
2017)], where any tax payable by a private company (including a private company
that has been wound up or gone into liquidation) in respect of any tax year cannot
be recovered from the company, every person who was, at any time in that tax
year —
(a) a director of the company, other than an employed director; or
(b) a shareholder in the company owning not less than ten per cent of
the paid-up capital of the company,
shall be jointly and severally liable for payment of the tax due by the company.
(2) Any director who pays tax under sub-section (1) shall be entitled to
recover the tax paid from the company or a share of the tax from any other director.
(3) A shareholder who pays tax under sub-section (1) shall be entitled to
recover the tax paid from the company or from any other shareholder to whom
clause (b) of sub-section (1) applies in proportion to the shares owned by that other
shareholder.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2002.
Added by the Finance Act, 2010.
The expression “Companies Ordinance, 1984 (XLVII of 1984)” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
(4) Notwithstanding anything in any law, where any tax payable by a
member of an association of persons in respect of the member’s share of the
income of the association in respect of any tax year cannot be recovered from the
member, the association shall be liable for the tax due by the member.
1[(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, for the time
being in force, where any tax payable by an association of persons in respect of
any tax year cannot be recovered from the association of persons, every person
who was, at any time in that year, a member of the association of persons, shall
be jointly and severally liable for payment of the tax due by the association of
persons.
(6) Any member who pays tax under sub-section (5) shall be entitled to
recover the tax paid from the association of persons or a share of the tax from any
other member.]
2[(7)] The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to any amount due under
this section as if it were tax due under an assessment order.
140. Recovery of tax from persons holding money on behalf of a taxpayer.—
(1) For the purpose of recovering any tax due by a taxpayer, the Commissioner
may, by notice, in writing, require any person –
(a) owing or who may owe money to the taxpayer; or
(b) holding or who may hold money for, or on account of the taxpayer;
(c) holding or who may hold money on account of some other person for
payment to the taxpayer; or
(d) having authority of some other person to pay money to the taxpayer,
to pay to the Commissioner so much of the money as set out in the notice by the
date set out in the notice3[:]
4[Provided that the Commissioner shall not issue notice under this
sub-section for recovery of any tax due from a taxpayer if the said taxpayer
has filed an appeal under section 127 in respect of the order under which
the tax sought to be recovered has become payable and the appeal has not
been decided by the Commissioner (Appeals), subject to the condition that
5[ten] per cent of the said amount of tax due has been paid by the taxpayer.]
New sub-sections (5) and (6) inserted through Finance Act, 2019.
Sub-section (5) re-numbered as sub-section (7) through Finance Act, 2019.
Full-stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2016.
Added by the Finance Act, 2016.
The expression “twenty-five” substituted by the Finance Act, 2018
(2) Subject to sub-section (3), the amount set out in a notice under sub-
section (1) —
(a) where the amount of the money is equal to or less than the
amount of tax due by the taxpayer, shall not exceed the amount
of the money; or
(b) in any other case, shall be so much of the money as is sufficient
to pay the amount of tax due by the taxpayer.
(3) Where a person is liable to make a series of payments (such as salary) to
a taxpayer, a notice under sub-section (1) may specify an amount to be paid out of each
payment until the amount of tax due by the taxpayer has been paid.
(4) The date for payment specified in a notice under sub-section (1) shall
not be a date before the money becomes payable to the taxpayer or held on the
taxpayer’s behalf.
(5) The provisions of sections 160, 161, 162 and 163, so far as may be,
shall apply to an amount due under this section as if the amount were required to
be deducted from a payment under Division III of Part V of this Chapter.
(6) Any person who has paid any amount in compliance with a notice
under sub-section (1) shall be treated as having paid such amount under the
authority of the taxpayer and the receipt of the Commissioner constitutes a good
and sufficient discharge of the liability of such person to the taxpayer to the extent
of the amount referred to in such receipt.
1[(6A) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Ordinance or any other law
or any rule, any decision or judgment of any court, forum or authority, the tax
payable under any provision of this Ordinance or any assessment order shall
become immediately payable subject to the following conditions —
(a) that the case has been decided in the favor of the department at three
appellate forums including the High Court;
(b) that the recovery under this section shall only be made to the extent
of lowest amount of demand which has been confirmed by any of the
three appellate forums; and
(c) that the tax payable exceeds rupees two hundred million,
and the Commissioner shall proceed to recover the said amount irrespective of the
time provided under any other provision or the said decision or judgment.]
Sub-section (6A) inserted by the Finance Act, 2025.
1[ ]
2[ ]
3[ ]
(10) In this section, "person" includes any Court, Tribunal or any other
authority.
141. Liquidators.— (1) Every person (hereinafter referred to as a “liquidator”)
who is –
(a) a liquidator of a company;
(b) a receiver appointed by a Court or appointed out of Court;
(c) a trustee for a bankrupt; or
(d) a mortgagee in possession,
shall, within fourteen days of being appointed or taking possession of an asset in
Pakistan, whichever occurs first, give written notice thereof to the Commissioner.
(2) The Commissioner shall, within three months of being notified under
sub-section (1), notify the liquidator in writing of the amount which appears to the
Commissioner to be sufficient to provide for any tax which is or will become
payable by the person whose assets are in the possession of the liquidator.
(3) A liquidator shall not, without leave of the Commissioner, part with any
asset held as liquidator until the liquidator has been notified under sub-section (2).
(4) A liquidator —
(a) shall set aside, out of the proceeds of sale of any asset by the
liquidator, the amount notified by the Commissioner under sub-
section (2), or such lesser amount as is subsequently agreed to
by the Commissioner;
(b) shall be liable to the extent of the amount set aside for the tax
of the person who owned the asset; and
Sub-section (7) omitted by the Finance Act, 2003. The omitted sub-section (7) read as follows:
“(7) Where an amount has been paid under sub-section (1), the taxpayer shall be allowed
a tax credit for the amount (unless the amount paid represents a final tax on the taxpayer’s income)
in computing the tax due by the taxpayer on the taxpayer’s taxable income for the tax year in which
the amount was paid.”
Sub-section (8) omitted by the Finance Act, 2003. The omitted sub-section (8) read as follows:
“(8) The tax credit allowed under this section shall be applied in accordance with sub-section
(3) of section 4.”
Sub-section (9) omitted by the Finance Act, 2003. The omitted sub-section (9) read as follows:
“(9) A tax credit or part of a tax credit allowed under this section for a tax year that is not
able to be credited under sub-section (3) of section 4 for the year must be refunded to the taxpayer
in accordance with section 170.”
(c) may pay any debt that has priority over the tax referred to in this
section notwithstanding any provision of this section.
(5) A liquidator shall be personally liable to the extent of any amount
required to be set aside under sub-section (4) for the tax referred to in sub-section
(2) if, and to the extent that, the liquidator fails to comply with the requirements of
this section.
(6) Where the proceeds of sale of any asset are less than the amount
notified by the Commissioner under sub-section (2), the application of sub-sections
(4) and (5) shall be limited to the proceeds of sale.
(7) This section shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law for the time being in force.
(8) The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to any amount due under
this section as if it were tax due under an assessment order.
142. Recovery of tax due by non-resident member of an association of
persons.— (1) The tax due by a non-resident member of an association of
persons in respect of the member’s share of the profits of the association shall be
assessable in the name of the association or of any resident member of the
association and may be recovered out of the assets of the association or from the
resident member personally.
(2) A person making a payment under this section shall be treated as
acting under the authority of the non-resident member and is hereby indemnified
in respect of the payment against all proceedings, civil or criminal, and all
processes, judicial or extra-judicial, notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary
in any written law, contract or agreement.
(3) The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to any amount due under
this section as if it were tax due under an assessment order.
143. Non-resident ship owner or charterer.— (1) Before the departure of a
ship owned or chartered by a non-resident person from any port in Pakistan, the
master of the ship shall furnish to the Commissioner a return showing the gross
amount specified in sub-section (1) of section 7 in respect of the ship.
(2) Where the master of a ship has furnished a return under sub-section
(1), the Commissioner shall 1[, after calling for such particulars, accounts or
documents as he may require,] determine the amount of tax due under section 7
in respect of the ship and, as soon as possible, notify the master, in writing, of the
amount payable.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2002.
(3) The master of a ship shall be liable for the tax notified under sub-
section (2) and the provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to such tax as if it were
tax due under an assessment order.
(4) Where the Commissioner is satisfied that the master of a ship or non-
resident owner or charterer of the ship is unable to furnish the return required under
sub-section (1) before the departure of the ship from a port in Pakistan, the
Commissioner may allow the return to be furnished within thirty days of departure
of the ship provided the non-resident owner or charterer has made satisfactory
arrangements for the payment of the tax due under section 7 in respect of the ship.
(5) The Collector of Customs or other authorised officer shall not grant a
port clearance for a ship owned or chartered by a non-resident person until the
Collector or officer is satisfied that any tax due under section 7 in respect of the
ship has been paid or that arrangements for its payment have been made to the
satisfaction of the Commissioner.
(6) This section shall not relieve the non-resident owner or charterer of
the ship from liability to pay any tax due under this section that is not paid by the
master of the ship.
144. Non-resident aircraft owner or charterer. — (1) A non-resident owner or
charterer of an aircraft 1[ ] liable for tax under section 7, or an agent authorised by the
non-resident person for this purpose, shall furnish to the Commissioner, within forty-
five days from the last day of each quarter of the financial year, a return, in respect of
the quarter, showing the gross amount specified in sub-section (1) of section 7 of the
non-resident person for the quarter.
(2) Where a return has been furnished under sub-section (1), the
Commissioner shall 2[, after calling for such particulars, accounts or documents as
he may require,] determine the amount of tax due under section 7 by the non-
resident person for the quarter and notify the non-resident person, in writing, of the
amount payable.
(3) The non-resident person shall be liable to pay the tax notified under
sub-section (2) within the time specified in the notice and the provisions of this
Ordinance shall apply to such tax as if it were tax due under an assessment order.
(4) Where the tax referred to in sub-section (3) is not paid within three
months of service of the notice, the Commissioner may issue to the authority by
whom clearance may be granted to the aircraft operated by the non-resident
person a certificate specifying the name of the non-resident person and the amount
of tax due.
The words “shall be” omitted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2002
(5) The authority to whom a certificate is issued under sub-section (4)
shall refuse clearance from any airport in Pakistan to any aircraft owned or
chartered by the non-resident until the tax due has been paid.
1[145. Assessment of persons about to leave Pakistan.— (1) Where any person is
likely to leave Pakistan during the currency of tax year or shortly after its expiry with no
intention of returning to Pakistan, he shall give to the Commissioner a notice to that
effect not less than fifteen days before the probable date of his departure (hereinafter
in this section referred to as the ‘said date’).
(2) The notice under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by a return or
returns of taxable income in respect of the period commencing from the end of the
latest tax year for which an assessment has been or, where no such assessment
has been made, a return has been made, as the case may be, and ending on the
said date, or where no such assessment or return has been made, the tax year or
tax years comprising the period ending on the said date; and the period
commencing from the end of the latest tax year to the said date shall, for the
purposes of this section, be deemed to be a tax year (distinct and separate from
any other tax year) in which the said date falls.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), the
Commissioner may serve a notice on any person who, in his opinion, is likely to leave
Pakistan during the current tax year or shortly after its expiry and has no intention of
returning to Pakistan, to furnish within such time as may be specified in such notice, a
return or returns of taxable income for the tax year or tax years for which the taxpayer
is required to furnish such return or returns under sub-section (2).
(4) The taxable income shall be charged to tax at the rates applicable to
the relevant tax year and all the provisions of this Ordinance shall, so far as may
be, apply accordingly.]
2[(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, for the time
being in force, where on the basis of information received from any offshore
Section 145 substituted by the Finance Act, 2003. The substituted section 145 read as follows:
“145. Collection of tax from persons leaving Pakistan permanently.- (1) Where the
Commissioner has reasonable grounds to believe that a person may leave Pakistan permanently
without paying tax due under this Ordinance, the Commissioner may issue a certificate containing
particulars of the tax due to the Commissioner of Immigration and request the Commissioner of
Immigration to prevent that person from leaving Pakistan until that person -
(a) makes payment of tax in full; or
(b) makes an arrangement satisfactory to the Commissioner for payment of the tax
due.
(2) A copy of a certificate issued under sub-section (1) shall be served on the person named
in the certificate if it is practicable to do so.
(3) Payment of the tax specified in the certificate to a customs or immigration officer or the
production of a certificate signed by the Commissioner stating that the tax has been paid or
satisfactory arrangements for payment have been made shall be sufficient authority for allowing the
person to leave Pakistan.”
New sub-section (5) added through Finance Act, 2019.
jurisdiction, the Commissioner has reason to believe that such person who is likely
to leave Pakistan may be involved in offshore tax evasion or such person is about
to dispose of any such asset, the Commissioner may freeze any domestic asset
of the person including any asset beneficially owned by the person for a period of
one hundred and twenty days or till the finalization of proceeding including but not
limited to recovery proceedings under this Ordinance whichever is earlier.]
146. Recovery of tax from persons assessed in Azad Jammu and Kashmir
1[and Gilgit-Baltistan.]— (1) Where any person assessed to tax for any tax year
under the law relating to income tax in the Azad Jammu and Kashmir 2[or Gilgit-
Baltistan] has failed to pay the tax and the income tax authorities of the Azad Jammu
and Kashmir 3[or Gilgit-Baltistan] cannot recover the tax because —
(a) the person’s resi44dence is in Pakistan; or
(b) the person has no movable or immovable property in the Azad
Jammu and Kashmir4[or Gilgit-Baltistan],
the Deputy Commissioner in the Azad Jammu and Kashmir 5[or Gilgit-Baltistan]
may forward a certificate of recovery to the Commissioner and, on receipt of such
certificate, the Commissioner shall recover the tax referred to in the certificate in
accordance with this Part.
(2) A certificate of recovery under sub-section (1) shall be in the
prescribed form specifying —
(a) the place of residence of the person in Pakistan;
(b) the description and location of movable or immovable property
of the person in Pakistan; and
(c) the amount of tax payable by the person.
6[146A. Initiation, validity, etc., of recovery proceedings.— (1) Any proceedings
for the recovery of tax under this Part may be initiated at any time.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2017.
Inserted by the Finance Act 2017.
Inserted by the Finance Act 2017.
Inserted by the Finance Act 2017.
Inserted by the Finance Act 2017.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2002.
(2) The Commissioner may, at any time, amend the certificate issued
under section 138A, or recall such certificate and issue fresh certificate, as he
thinks fit.
(3) It shall not be open to a taxpayer to question before the District Officer
(Revenue) the validity or correctness of any certificate issued under section 138A,
or any such certificate as amended, or any fresh certificate issued, under sub-
section (2).
(4) The several modes of recovery provided in this Part shall be deemed
to be neither mutually exclusive nor affect in any way any other law for the time
being in force relating to the recovery of debts due to the Government and the
Commissioner may have recourse to any such mode of recovery notwithstanding
that the tax due is being recovered from a taxpayer by any other mode.]
1[146B. Tax arrears settlement incentives scheme.— (1) Subject to provisions
of this Ordinance, the Board may make scheme in respect of recovery of tax
arrears or withholding taxes and waiver of 2[default surcharge]or penalty levied
thereon.
(2) The Board may make rules under section 237 for implementation of such
scheme.]
3[146C. Assistance in the recovery and collection of taxes.— The provisions
of sections 138, 138A, 138B, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 146A, and
146B shall mutatis mutandis apply in respect of assistance in collection and
recovery of taxes in pursuance of a request from a foreign jurisdiction under a tax
treaty, a multilateral convention, an intergovernmental agreement or similar
arrangement or mechanism.]
4[146D. Recovery of liability outstanding under other laws. – (1) Where any
outstanding liability in or under any other statute or law for the time being in force
enacted through an Act of Parliament, in respect of any defaulter is –
(a) treated as Income Tax arrears in that law;
(b) required to be recovered or collected by Commissioner (Inland
Revenue); or
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2008.
The word “additional tax” substituted by the Finance Act, 2010. The substituted provision has been
made effective from 05.06.2010 by sub-clause (77) of clause 8 of the Finance Act, 2010. Earlier the
substitution was made through Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2009 which was re-promulgated
as Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2010 and remained effective till 05.06.2010.
3 Section 146C inserted by the Finance Act, 2021.
4 Section 146D inserted by the Finance Act, 2023.
(c) is referred to Commissioner (Inland Revenue) for the recovery –
the Commissioner (Inland Revenue) shall recover the said liability and deposit the
receipts in the designated account specified in that law.]
