PART I
COMPUTATION OF TAXABLE INCOME
9. Taxable income.—The taxable income of a person for a tax year shall be
the total income 1[under clause (a) of section 10] of the person for the year reduced
(but not below zero) by the total of any deductible allowances under Part IX of this
Chapter of the person for the year.
10. Total Income.— The total income of a person for a tax year shall be the
sum of the 2[—]
3[(a) person’s income under all heads of income for the year; and]
4[(b) person’s income exempt from tax under any of the provisions of
this Ordinance.]
11. Heads of income.— (1) For the purposes of the imposition of tax and the
computation of total income, all income shall be classified under the following
heads, namely: —
(a) Salary;
5[(b) Income from Property;]
6[(c) Income from Business;]
7[(d) Capital Gains; and]
8[(e) Income from Other Sources.]
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2012.
The words “person’s income under each of the heads of income for the year” substituted by the
Finance Act, 2012.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2012.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2012.
Clause (b) substituted by the Finance Act, 2002. The substituted clause (b) read as follows:
“(b) income from property;”
Clause (c) substituted by the Finance Act, 2002. The substituted clause (c) read as follows:
“(c) income from business;”
Clause (d) substituted by the Finance Act, 2002. The substituted clause (d) read as follows:
“(d) capital gains; and”
Clause (e) substituted by the Finance Act, 2002. The substituted clause (e) read as follows:
“(e) income from other sources.”
(2) Subject to this Ordinance, the income of a person under a head of
income for a tax year shall be the total of the amounts derived by the person in
that year that are chargeable to tax under the head as reduced by the total
deductions, if any, allowed under this Ordinance to the person for the year under
that head.
(3) Subject to this Ordinance, where the total deductions allowed under
this Ordinance to a person for a tax year under a head of income exceed the total
of the amounts derived by the person in that year that are chargeable to tax under
that head, the person shall be treated as sustaining a loss for that head for that
year of an amount equal to the excess.
(4) A loss for a head of income for a tax year shall be dealt with in
accordance with Part VIII of this Chapter.
(5) The income of a resident person under a head of income shall be
computed by taking into account amounts that are Pakistan-source income and
amounts that are foreign-source income.
(6) The income of a non-resident person under a head of income shall be
computed by taking into account only amounts that are Pakistan-source income.
