PART II
ASSESSMENTS
1[120. Assessments.—(1) Where a taxpayer has furnished a complete return of
income (other than a revised return under sub-section (6) of section 114) for a tax
year ending on or after the 1st day of July, 2002,—
(a) the Commissioner shall be taken to have made an assessment of
taxable income for that tax year, and the tax due thereon 2[equal to
the respective amounts adjusted under sub-section (2A)] 3[ ] ; and
(b) the return shall be taken for all purposes of this Ordinance to be an
assessment order issued to the taxpayer by the Commissioner on the
day the 4[adjustments were made under sub-section (2A)] 5[ ] 6[return
was furnished] 7[:
Provided that until the date specified under the fourth proviso to
sub-section (2A) is notified, this subsection shall be in force as if sub-
section (2A) is not in operation:
Provided further that once the date under the fourth proviso to
sub-section (2A) is notified, clauses (a) and (b) shall only apply when
the provisions of sub-section (2A), if invoked, are first complied with:
Provided further once compliance is made under the second
proviso,—
(i) the adjusted amount under sub-section (2A) shall be construed
to be the tax payable and due under clause (a); and
Section 120 substituted by the Finance Act, 2003. The substituted section 120 read as follows:
“120. Assessments.- Where a taxpayer has furnished a return of income (other than a revised return
under sub-section (6) of section 114) for a tax year ending on or after the 1st day of July, 2002, –
(a) the Commissioner shall be taken to have made an assessment of the taxable
income of the taxpayer for the year and the tax due thereon, equal to those
respective amounts specified in the return; and
(b) the taxpayer’s return shall be taken for all purposes of this Ordinance to be an
assessment order issued to the taxpayer by the Commissioner on the day the
return was furnished.”
The expression inserted by the Finance Act, 2025.
The expression “, equal to the respective amounts adjusted under sub-section (2A)” omitted by the
Finance Act, 2021. Earlier this omission was made through Income Tax (Amendment) Ordinance,
2021.
The expression inserted by the Finance Act, 2025.
The expressions “return was furnished” substituted through Finance Act, 2020
The expression “adjustments were made under sub-section (2A)” substituted by the Finance Act,
2021. ” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier the substitution was made through Income Tax
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
Full stop substituted and provisos added by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier the substitution and
addition was made through Income Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
(ii) the date of the compliance under sub-section (2A) shall be the
date for the purposes of clause (b).]
1[(1A) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section (1), the Commissioner
may 2[conduct audit of the income tax affairs of a person] under section 177 and
all the provisions of that section shall apply accordingly.]
(2) A return of income shall be taken to be complete if it is in accordance
with the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 114.
3[(2A) A return of income furnished under sub-section (2) of section 114 shall
be processed through automated system to arrive at correct amounts of total
income, taxable income and tax payable by making adjustments for-
(i) any arithmetical error in the return;
(ii) any incorrect claim, if such incorrect claim is apparent from any
information in the return;
(iii) disallowance of any loss, deductible allowance or tax credit under
Parts VIII, IX and X respectively of Chapter III; and
(iv) disallowance of carry forward of any loss under clause (b) of sub-
section (I)of section 182A:
Provided that no such adjustments shall be made unless a
system generated notice is given to the taxpayer specifying the
adjustments intended to be made:
Provided further that the response received from the taxpayer,
if any, shall be considered before making any adjustment, and in a
case where no response is received within thirty days of the issue of
such notice, adjustments shall be made.
Provided also that where no such adjustments have been made
within six month of filing of return, the amounts specified in the return
as declared by the taxpayer shall be deemed to have been taken as
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2005.
The words “select a person for an audit of his income tax affairs” substituted by the Finance Act, 2010.
The substituted provision has been made effective from 05.06.2010 by sub-clause (77) of clause 8
of the Finance Act, 2010. Earlier the substitution was made through Finance (Amendment)
Ordinance, 2009 which was re-promulgated as Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2010 and
remained effective till 05.06.2010.
3 New sub-section (2A) inserted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
adjusted amounts on the day the return was filed and the taxpayer
shall be intimated automatically through Iris] 1[:
Provided also that the provisions of this sub-section shall apply
from the date notified by the Federal Board of Revenue in the official
Gazette.]
(3) Where the return of income furnished is not complete, the
Commissioner shall issue a notice to the taxpayer informing him of the deficiencies
(other than incorrect amount of tax payable on taxable income, as specified in the
return, or short payment of tax payable) and directing him to provide such
information, particulars, statement or documents by such date specified in the
notice.
(4) Where a taxpayer fails to fully comply, by the due date, with the
requirements of the notice under sub-section (3), the return furnished shall be
treated as an invalid return as if it had not been furnished.
(5) Where, in response to a notice under sub-section (3), the taxpayer
has, by the due date, fully complied with the requirements of the notice, the return
furnished shall be treated to be complete on the day it was furnished and the
provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply accordingly.
(6) No notice under sub-section (3) shall be issued after the 2[expiry of
one hundred and eighty days from the end of the financial year in which return was
furnished], and the provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply accordingly.]
3[(7) For the purposes of this section,-
(a) “arithmetical error” includes any wrong or incorrect calculation
of tax payable including any minimum or final tax payable.
(b) “an incorrect claim apparent from any information in the return”
shall mean a claim, on the basis of an entry, in the return,-
(i) of an item, which is inconsistent with another entry of the
same or some other item in such return;
(ii) regarding any tax payment which is not verified from the
collection system; or
(iii) in respect of a deduction, where such deduction exceeds
specified statutory limit which may have been expressed
as monetary amount or percentage or ratio or fraction.]
Full stop substituted and proviso added by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier the substitution and
addition was made through Income Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
The words “end of the financial year in which return was furnished” the Finance Act, 2012.
New sub-section 7 added through Finance Act, 2020
1[ ]
2[120B. Restriction of proceedings.- (1) Where any person entitled to declare
undisclosed assets, expenditure and undisclosed sales under the Assets
Declaration Act, 2019 declares such assets, expenditures or sales to pay tax, no
proceedings shall be undertaken under this Ordinance in respect of such
declaration.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, for the time
being in force, sub-section (3) of section 216, except the provisions of clauses (a)
and (g) of sub-section (3) of section 216, particulars of the persons making
declaration under the Assets Declaration Act, 2019 or any information received in
any declaration made under the said Act shall be confidential.]
3[121. Best judgement assessment.— (1) Where a person fails to —
Section 120A omitted by the Finance Act, 2013. The omitted section 120A read as follows:
“120A.Investment Tax on income.— (1) Subject to this Ordinance, the Board may make a scheme
of payment of investment tax in respect of undisclosed income, representing any amount or
investment made in movable or immovable assets.
(2) Where any person declares undisclosed income under sub-section (1) in accordance with
the scheme and the rules, the tax on such income called investment tax shall be charged at such rate
as may be prescribed.
(3) Where a person has paid tax on his undisclosed income in accordance with the scheme
and the rules, he shall –
(a) be entitled to incorporate in his books of account such undisclosed income in tangible form;
and
(b) not be liable to pay any tax, charge, levy, penalty or prosecution in respect of such income
under this Ordinance.
(4) For the purposes of this section —
(i) “undisclosed income” means any income, including any investment to be deemed
as income under section 111 or any other deemed income, for any year or years,
which was chargeable to tax but was not so charged; and
(ii) “investment tax” means tax chargeable on the undisclosed income under the
scheme under sub-section (1) and shall have the same meaning as given in clause
(63) of section 2 of the Income Tax Ordinance, 2001.”
New Section (120B) inserted though Finance Act, 2019.
Section 121 substituted by the Finance Act, 2003. The substituted section 121 read as follows:
“121. Assessment of persons who have not furnished a return.- (1) Where a person
required by the Commissioner through a notice] to furnish a return of income for a tax year fails to
do so by the due date, the Commissioner may, based on any available information and to the best
of the Commissioner’s judgement, make an assessment of the taxable income of the person and
the tax due thereon for the year.
(2) As soon as possible after making an assessment under this section, the Commissioner
shall issue, in writing, an assessment order to the taxpayer stating –
(a) the taxable income of the taxpayer for the year;
(b) the amount of tax due;
(c) the amount of tax paid, if any; and
(d) the time, place, and manner of appealing the assessment order.
(3) An assessment order shall only be issued within five years after the end of the tax year,
or the income year, to which it relates.”
1[ ]
2[ ]
3[(ab) furnish return of income in response to notice under sub-
section (3) or sub-section (4) of section 114; or”;]
4[(ac) furnish return of income in response to notice under sub-section
(3) of section 117; or]
(b) furnish a return as required under section 143 or section 144;
or
(c) furnish the statement as required under section 116; or
(d) produce before the Commissioner, or 5[a special audit panel
appointed under sub-section (11) of section 177 or]any person
employed by a firm of chartered accountants 6[or a firm of cost
and management accountants] under section 177, accounts,
documents and records required to be maintained under section
174, or any other relevant document or evidence that may be
required by him for the purpose of making assessment of
income and determination of tax due thereon,
the Commissioner may, based on any available information or material and to the
best of his judgement, make an assessment of the taxable income 7[or income] of
the person and the tax due thereon 8[and the assessment, if any, treated to have
been made on the basis of return or revised return filed by the taxpayer shall be of
no legal effect].
Omitted by the Finance Act, 2010. The omitted clause (a) read as follows:
“(a) furnish a return of income as required by a notice under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4)
of section 114; or
2 Clause “(aa)” omitted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020 the omitted clause read as
follows: “(aa) furnish a statement as required by a notice under sub-section (5) of section 115; or”
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2017.
Clause (ac) inserted by the Finance Act, 2024.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2015
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2010.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2010.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2012.
1[(1A) For the purposes of making a best judgment assessment under sub-
section (1), the Commissioner may determine taxable income on the basis of
sectoral benchmark ratios prescribed by the Board.
Explanation.- The expression “sectoral benchmark ratios” means standard
business sector ratios notified by the Board on the basis of comparative cases and
includes financial ratios, production ratios, gross profit ratio, net profit ratio,
recovery ratio, wastage ratio and such other ratios in respect of such sectors as
may be prescribed.]
(2) As soon as possible after making an assessment under this section,
the Commissioner shall issue the assessment order to the taxpayer stating—
(a) the taxable income;
(b) the amount of tax due;
(c) the amount of tax paid, if any; and
(d) the time, place and manner of appealing the assessment order.
(3) An assessment order under this section shall only be issued within
2[six] years after the end of the tax year or the income year to which it relates 3[:]
4[Provided that where notice for furnishing a return of income under
sub-section (4) of section 114 is issued in respect of one or more of the last
ten completed tax years in pursuance of proviso to sub-section (5) of section
114 an assessment order under this section shall only be issued within two
years from the end of tax year in which such notice is issued.]
122. Amendment of assessments.— (1) Subject to this section, the
Commissioner may amend an assessment order treated as issued under section
120 or issued under section 1215[, 6[ ] 7[or 8[ ], by making such alterations or
additions as the Commissioner considers necessary 9[ ].
Sub-section (1A) inserted by the Finance Act, 2024.
The word “five” substituted by the Finance Act, 2022.
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act 2018.
Added by the Finance Act, 2018.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2012.
The expression “or issued under section 122C,”omitted by the Finance Act, 2017
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2002
The words, commas and the figures “issued under section 59, 59A, 62, 63 or 65 of the repealed
Ordinance “ omitted by the Finance Act, 2012.
The words “to ensure that the taxpayer is liable for correct amount of tax for the tax year to which the
assessment order relates” omitted by the Finance Act, 2003.
1[(2) No order under sub-section (1) shall be amended by the
Commissioner after the expiry of five years from the end of the financial year in
which the Commissioner has issued or treated to have issued the assessment
order to the taxpayer.]
(3) Where a taxpayer furnishes a revised return under sub-section (6)
2[or (6A)] of section 114 —
(a) the Commissioner shall be treated as having made an amended
assessment of the taxable income and tax payable thereon as
set out in the revised return; and
(b) the taxpayer’s revised return shall be taken for all purposes of
this Ordinance to be an amended assessment order issued to
the taxpayer by the Commissioner on the day on which the
revised return was furnished.
(4) Where an assessment order (hereinafter referred to as the “original
assessment”) has been amended under sub-section (1) 3[,] (3) 4[or (5A)], the
Commissioner may further amend,5[as many times as may be necessary,] the
original assessment within the later of —
(a) five years 6[from the end of the financial year in which] the
Commissioner has issued or is treated as having issued the
original assessment order to the taxpayer; or
(b) one year 7[from the end of the financial year in which] the
Commissioner has issued or is treated as having issued the
amended assessment order to the taxpayer.
Sub-section (2) substituted by the Finance Act, 2009. The substituted sub-section (2) read as
follows:
“(2) An assessment order shall only be amended under subsection (1) within five years after the
Commissioner has issued or is treated as having issued the assessment order on the taxpayer.”
Substituted by the Finance Act, 2010. The substituted provision has been made effective from
05.06.2010 by sub-clause (77) of clause 8 of the Finance Act, 2010. Earlier the substitution was
made through Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2009 which was re-promulgated as Finance
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2010 and remained effective till 05.06.2010.
The word “or” substituted by the Finance Act, 2010.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2010. Amendment made in sub-section (4) has been validated through
sub-clause (18)(b) of clause (8) of Finance Act, 2010, with effect from the first day of July, 2003.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2002
The word “after” substituted by the Finance Act, 2009.
The word “after” substituted by the Finance Act, 2009.
1[(4A) In respect of an assessment made under the repealed Ordinance,
nothing contained in sub-section (2) or, as the case may be, sub-section (4) shall
be so construed as to have extended or curtailed the time limit specified in section
65 of the aforesaid Ordinance in respect of an assessment order passed under
that section and the time-limit specified in that section shall apply accordingly.]
2[(5) An assessment order in respect of tax year, or an assessment year,
shall only be amended under sub-section (1) and an amended assessment for that
year shall only be further amended under sub-section (4) where, on the basis of
3[audit or on the basis of definite information] the Commissioner is satisfied that —
(i) any income chargeable to tax has escaped assessment; or
(ii) total income has been under-assessed, or assessed at too low
a rate, or has been the subject of excessive relief or refund; or
(iii) any amount under a head of income has been mis-classified.]
4[(5A) Subject to sub-section (9), the Commissioner may 5[, ] 6[ ] amend, or
further amend, an assessment order, if he considers that the assessment order is
erroneous in so far it is prejudicial to the interest of revenue.]
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003. Earlier sub-section (4A) was inserted by S.R.O. 633(I)/2002, dated
14.09.2002 which stands rescinded by SRO 608(I)/2003, dated 24.06.2003 with effect from
01.07.2003. The said sub-section (4A) read as follows:
“(4A) An amended assessment shall only be made within six years of the date of original
assessment.”
Sub-section (5) substituted by the Finance Act, 2003. The substituted sub-section (5) read as follows:
“(5) An assessment order shall only be amended under sub-section (1) and an amended
assessment shall only be amended under subsection (4) where the Commissioner –
(a) is of the view that this Ordinance or the repealed Ordinance] has been incorrectly
applied in making the assessment (including the misclassification of an amount
under a head of income, incorrect payment of tax with the return of income, an
incorrect claim for tax relief or rebate, an incorrect claim for exemption of any
amount or an incorrect claim for a refund); or
(b) has definite information acquired from an audit or otherwise that the income has
been concealed or inaccurate particulars of income have been furnished or the
assessment is otherwise incorrect.”
Expressions “definite information acquired from an audit or otherwise,” substituted through Finance
Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003. Earlier sub-section (5A) was inserted by S.R.O. 633(I)/2002, dated
14.09.2002 which stands rescinded by SRO 608(I)/2003, dated 24.06.2003 with effect from
01.07.2003. The said sub-section (5A) read as follows:
“(5A) Where a person does not produce accounts and records, or details of expenditure,
assets and liabilities or any other information required for the purposes of audit under section177,
or does not file wealth statement under section 116, the Commissioner may, based on any available
information and to the best of Commissioner’s judgement; make an amended assessment.”
Added by Finance Act, 2012.
The expression “after making, or causing to be made, such enquiries as he deems necessary,”
omitted by the Finance Act, 2021.
1[(5AA) In respect of any subject matter which was not in dispute in an appeal the
Commissioner shall have and shall be deemed always to have had the powers to amend
or further amend an assessment order under sub-section (5A).]
2[(5B) Any amended assessment order under sub-section (5A) may be passed
within the time-limit specified in sub-section (2) or sub-section (4), as the case may be.]
(6) As soon as possible after making an amended assessment under 3[sub-
section (1), sub-section (4) or sub-section (5A)], the Commissioner shall issue an
amended assessment order to the taxpayer stating –
(a) the amended taxable income of the taxpayer;
(b) the amended amount of tax due;
(c) the amount of tax paid, if any; and
(d) the time, place, and manner of appealing the amended assessment.
(7) An amended assessment order shall be treated in all respects as an
assessment order for the purposes of this Ordinance, other than for the purposes
of sub-section (1).
(8) For the purposes of this section, “definite information” includes information
on sales or purchases of any goods made by the taxpayer, 4[receipts of the taxpayer
from services rendered or any other receipts that may be chargeable to tax under this
Ordinance,]and on the acquisition, possession or disposal of any money, asset, valuable
article or investment made or expenditure incurred by the taxpayer.
5[(9) No assessment shall be amended, or further amended, under this section
unless the taxpayer has been provided with an opportunity of being heard] 6[:
7[Provided that order under this section shall be made within one year of issuance
of show cause notice or within such extended period as the Commissioner may, for
1 Added by the Finance Act, 2010.
2 Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
3 The words, brackets and figures “sub-section (1) or (4)” substituted by the Finance Act, 2003.
4 Inserted by the Finance Act, 2002
5 Added by the Finance Act, 2002
6 Full stop substituted and two provisos added by the Finance Act, 2021.
7 Provisos substituted by the Finance Act, 2025.Substituted provisos read as follows:
“Provided that order under this section shall be made within one hundred and 7[eighty] days of issuance of
show cause notice or within such extended period as the Commissioner may, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, so however, such extended period shall in no case exceed ninety days. This proviso shall be applicable
to a show cause notice issued on or after the first day of July, 2021.
Provided further that any period during which the proceedings are adjourned on account of a stay order or
Alternative Dispute Resolution proceedings or agreed assessment proceedings under section 122D or the
time taken through adjournment by the taxpayer not exceeding sixty days shall be excluded from the
computation of the period specified in the first proviso.]”
reasons to be recorded in writing, so however, such extended period shall in no case
exceed ninety days. This proviso shall be applicable to a show cause notice issued on
or after the first day of July, 2021:
Provided further that any period during which the proceedings are adjourned on
account of a stay order or Alternative Dispute Resolution proceedings or agreed
assessment proceedings under section 122D or the time taken through adjournment by
the taxpayer not exceeding sixty days shall be excluded from the computation of the
period specified in the first proviso.] ]
1[122A. Revision by the Commissioner.—(1) The Commissioner may 2[ 3[, suomoto,]
] call for the record of any proceeding under this Ordinance or under the repealed
Ordinance in which an order has been passed by any 4[Officer of Inland Revenue] 5[ ] .
(2) Subject to sub-section (3), where, after making such inquiry as is
necessary, Commissioner considers that the order requires revision, the Commissioner
may 6[suomoto] make such revision to the order as the Commissioner deems fit.
(3) An order under sub-section (2) shall not be prejudicial to the person to
whom the order relates.
(4) The Commissioner shall not revise any order under sub-section (2) if—
(a) an appeal against the order lies to the Commissioner (Appeals) or
to the Appellate Tribunal, the time within which such appeal may be
made has not expired; or
(b) the order is pending in appeal before the Commissioner (Appeals)
or has been made the subject of an appeal to the Appellate
Tribunal.]
7[(5) If any order is remanded back to any lower authority by the Commissioner
for modification, alteration, implementation of directions or de novo proceedings, the
order giving effect to the directions of the Commissioner shall be issued within one
hundred and twenty days.]
Added by the Finance Act, 2003.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2004.
The word “suomoto” substituted by the Finance Act, 2005.
The words “Taxation Officer” substituted by the Finance Act, 2010. The substituted provision has been
made effective from 05.06.2010 by sub-clause (77) of clause 8 of the Finance Act, 2010. Earlier the
substitution was made through Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2009 which was re-promulgated
as Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2010 and remained effective till 05.06.2010.
5 The expression “other than the Commissioner (Appeals) 5[if the value of the assessment or, as the
case may be, refund of the tax does not exceed twenty million rupees,]” omitted by the Finance Act,
2024.
Words added by Finance Act, 2004.
Added by the Finance Act, 2021.
1[122B. Revision by the 2[Chief Commissioner].—(1) The 3[Chief Commissioner]
may, either of his own motion or on an application made by the taxpayer for
revision, call for the record of any proceedings relating to issuance of an exemption
or lower rate certificate with regard to collection or deduction of tax at source under
this Ordinance, in which an order has been passed by any authority subordinate
to him.
(2) Where, after making such inquiry as is necessary, 4[Chief Commissioner]
considers that the order requires revision, the 5[Chief Commissioner] may, after
providing reasonable opportunity of being heard to the taxpayer, make such order as
he may deem fit in the circumstances of the case.]
6[7[ ] ]
Added by the Finance Act, 2006.
The words “Regional Commissioner” Substituted by “Chief Commissioner” by Finance Act, 2014.
The words “Regional Commissioner” Substituted by “Chief Commissioner” by Finance Act, 2014.
The words “Regional Commissioner” Substituted by “Chief Commissioner” by Finance Act, 2014
The words “Regional Commissioner” Substituted by “Chief Commissioner” by Finance Act, 2014
Substituted by the Finance Act, 2010. The substituted provision has been made effective from 05.06.2010 by
sub-clause (77) of clause 8 of the Finance Act, 2010. Earlier the substitution was made through Finance
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2009 which was re-promulgated as Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2010 and
remained effective till 05.06.2010. The substituted section “122C” read as follows:
“122C. Provisional assessment. — (1) Where in response to a notice under sub-section (3) or sub-section
(4) of section 114 a person fails to furnish return of income for any tax year, the Commissioner may, based
on any available information or material and to the best of his judgment, make a provisional assessment of
the taxable income of the person and issue a provisional assessment order specifying the taxable income
assessed and the tax due thereon.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Ordinance, the provisional assessment completed
under sub-section (1) shall be treated as the final assessment after the expiry of sixty days from the date of
service of order of provisional assessment and the provisions of this Ordinance shall apply accordingly:
Provided that the provisions of sub-section (2) shall not apply if return of income along with wealth
statement, wealth reconciliation statement and other documents required under sub-section (2A) of
section 116 are filed by the person for the relevant tax year during the said period of sixty days.”
Section 122C omitted by Finance Act 2017,the omitted section 122C is read as under:
“122C. Provisional assessment.— (1) Where in response to a notice under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4)
of section 114 a person fails to furnish return of income for any tax year, the Commissioner may, based on any
available information or material and to the best of his judgment, make a provisional assessment of the taxable
income or income of the person and issue a provisional assessment order specifying the taxable income or
income assessed and the tax due thereon.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Ordinance, the provisional assessment order completed
under sub-section (1) shall be treated as the final assessment order after the expiry of 7[forty-five] days from the
date of service of order of provisional assessment and the provisions of this Ordinance shall apply accordingly:
7[“Provided that the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply, if—
(a) return of income along with wealth statement, wealth reconciliation statement and other
documents required under sub-section (2A) of section 116 are filed by the person being an
individual or an association of persons for the relevant tax year during the said period of forty-
five days; and
(b) the individual or an association of persons presents accounts and documents for
conducting audit of income tax affairs for that tax year:
Provided further that the provisions of sub-section (2) shall not apply—
1[122D. Agreed assessment in certain cases.- (1) Where a taxpayer, in
response to a notice under sub-section (9) of section 122, intends to settle his
case, he may file offer of settlement in the prescribed form before the assessment
oversight committee, hereinafter referred to as the Committee, in addition to filing
reply to the Commissioner.
(2) The Committee after examining the aforesaid offer may call for the
record of the case and after affording opportunity of being heard to the taxpayer,
may decide to accept or modify the offer of the taxpayer through consensus and
communicate its decision to the taxpayer.
(3) Where the taxpayer is stratified with the decision of the Committee,-
(a) the taxpayer shall deposit the amount of tax payable including any
amount of penalty and default surcharge as per decision of the
Committee;
(b) the Commissioner shall amend assessment in accordance with the
decision of the Committee after tax payable including any amount of
penalty and default surcharge as per decision of the Committee has
been paid;
(c) the taxpayer shall waive the right to prefer appeal against such amended
assessment; and
(d) no further proceedings shall be undertaken under this Ordinance in
respect of issues decided by the Committee unless the tax as per clause
(c) has not been deposited by the taxpayer.
(4) Where the Committee has not been able to arrive at a consensus or
where the taxpayer is not satisfied with the decision of the Committee, the case
shall be referred back to the Commissioner for decision on the basis of reply of the
taxpayer in response to notice under sub-section (9) of section 122
notwithstanding proceedings or decision, if any, of the Committee.
(5) The Committee shall comprise the following income tax authorities
having jurisdiction over the taxpayer, namely:-
(a) the Chief Commissioner Inland Revenue;
(b) the Commissioner Inland Revenue; and
(c) the Additional Commissioner Inland Revenue.
(a) to a company, if return of income tax alongwith audited accounts or final accounts, as the
case may be, for the relevant tax year are filed by the company electronically during the
said period of forty-five days; and
(b) if the company presents accounts and documents for conducting audit of its income tax
affairs for that tax year.”
1 New Section 122D inserted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
(6) This section shall not apply in cases involving concealment of income
or where interpretation of question of law is involved having effect on other cases.
(7) The Board may make rules regulating the procedure of the Committee
and for any matter connected with, or incidental to the proceedings of the
Committee.]
123. Provisional assessment in certain cases.— (1) Where a concealed asset
of any person is impounded by any department or agency of the Federal Government
or a Provincial Government, the Commissioner may, at any time before issuing any
assessment order under section 121 or any amended assessment order under section
122, issue to the person a provisional assessment order or provisional amended
assessment order, as the case may be, for the last completed tax year of the person
taking into account the concealed asset.
1[(1A) Where an offshore asset of any person, not declared earlier, is
discovered by the Commissioner or any department or agency of the Federal
Government or a Provincial Government, the Commissioner may at any time
before issuing any assessment order under section 121 or amended assessment
order under section 122, issue to the person a provisional assessment order or
provisional amended assessment order, as the case may be, for the last completed
tax year of the person taking into account the offshore asset discovered.]
(2) The Commissioner shall finalise a provisional assessment order or a
provisional amended assessment order as soon as practicable 2[ ].
(3) In this section, “concealed asset” means any property or asset which,
in the opinion of the Commissioner, was acquired from any income subject to tax
under this Ordinance.
124. Assessment giving effect to an order. — (1) Except where sub-section
(2) applies, where, in consequence of, or to give effect to, any finding or direction
in any order made under Part III of this Chapter by the Commissioner (Appeals),
3[if the value of the assessment or, as the case may be, refund of the tax does not
exceed twenty million rupees,] Appellate Tribunal, High Court, or Supreme Court
an assessment order or amended assessment order is to be issued to any person,
the Commissioner shall issue the order within two years from the end of the
financial year in which the order of the Commissioner (Appeals), 4[if the value of
the assessment or, as the case may be, refund of the tax does not exceed twenty
million rupees,] Appellate Tribunal, High Court or Supreme Court, as the case may
be, was served on the Commissioner.
New subsection 1A inserted through Finance Supplementary (Second Amendment) Act, 2019
The words “after making it” omitted by the Finance Act, 2003.
3 Inserted through The Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 2024.
4 Inserted through The Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 2024.
(2) Where, by an order made under Part III of this Chapter by the 1[ ]
Appellate Tribunal, High Court, or Supreme Court, an assessment order is set
aside 2[wholly or partly,] and the Commissioner 3[or Commissioner (Appeals), as
the case may be,] 4[if the value of the assessment or, as the case may be, refund
of the tax does not exceed twenty million rupees,] is directed to 5[pass] a new
assessment order, the Commissioner 6[or Commissioner (Appeals), as the case
may be,] 7[if the value of the assessment or, as the case may be, refund of the tax
does not exceed twenty million rupees,] shall 8[pass] the new order within 9[one
year from the end of the financial year in which] the Commissioner 10[or
Commissioner (Appeals), as the case may be,] 11[if the value of the assessment
or, as the case may be, refund of the tax does not exceed twenty million rupees,]
is served with the order 12[:]
13[Provided that limitation under this sub-section shall not
apply, if an appeal or reference has been preferred, against the order
14[ ], passed by 15[ ] Appellate Tribunal or a High Court.]
(3) Where an assessment order has been set aside or modified, the
proceedings may commence from the stage next preceding the stage at which
such setting aside or modification took place and nothing contained in this
Ordinance shall render necessary the re-issue of any notice which had already
been issued or the re-furnishing or re-filing of any return, statement, or other
particulars which had already been furnished or filed.
(4) Where direct relief is provided in an order under section 129 or 132,
the Commissioner shall issue appeal effect orders within two months of the date
the Commissioner is served with the order.
The words “Commissioner (Appeals)” omitted by the Finance Act, 2010.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2008.
4 Inserted through The Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 2024.
The word “make” substituted by the Finance Act, 2010.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2008.
7 Inserted through The Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 2024.
The word “make” substituted by the Finance Act, 2010.
The words “six months from the date” substituted by the Finance Act, 2002.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2008.
11 Inserted through Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 2024.
The full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2005.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2005.
The words “setting aside the assessment” omitted by the Finance Act, 2010.
The words “a Commissioner (Appeals)” omitted by the Finance Act, 2010.
1[(4A) Where the Commissioner (Appeals), Appellate Tribunal, High Court
or Supreme Court has confirmed the tax payable as determined in the order
appealed against no appeal effect order will be required to be issued and the
Commissioner shall proceed to effect recovery.
(4B) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) where the Appellate
Tribunal, High Court or Supreme Court has partly set aside the order and
confirmed or modified the order on some other issues that were subject matter of
the appeal, the Commissioner shall issue an appeal effect order on the prescribed
form determining the tax payable as a result of the confirmation or modification by
the Appellate Tribunal, High Court or Supreme Court and excluding the tax payable
on the matters that have been set aside or remanded and the tax payable on the
basis of the issues that have been confirmed or modified shall be paid or recovered
under the provisions of the Ordinance.]
(5) Where, by any order referred to in sub-section (1), any income is
excluded —
(a) from the computation of the taxable income of a taxpayer for
any year and held to be included in the computation of the
taxable income of the taxpayer for another year; or
(b) from the computation of the taxable income of one taxpayer and
held to be included in the computation of the taxable income of
another taxpayer,
the assessment or amended assessment relating to that other tax year or other
taxpayer, as the case may be, shall be treated as an assessment or amended
assessment to be made in consequence of, or to give effect to, a finding or
direction contained in such order.
(6) Nothing in this Part shall prevent the issuing of an assessment order
or an amended assessment order to give effect to an order made under Part III of
this Chapter by the Commissioner (Appeals), 2[if the value of the assessment or,
as the case may be, refund of the tax does not exceed twenty million rupees,]
Appellate Tribunal, High Court, or Supreme Court.
3[(7) The provisions of this section shall in like manner apply to any order
issued by any High Court or the Supreme Court in exercise of original or appellate
jurisdiction.]
Sub-sections (4A) and (4B) inserted by the Finance Act, 2025.
2 Inserted through Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 2024.
Added by the Finance Act, 2003.
1[124A. Powers of tax authorities to modify orders, etc.—(1) Where a question
of law has been decided by a High Court or the Appellate Tribunal in the case of a
taxpayer, on or after first day of July 2002, the Commissioner may, notwithstanding
that he has preferred an appeal against the decision of the High Court or made an
application for reference against the order of the Appellate Tribunal, as the case
may be, follow the said decision in the case of the said taxpayer in so far as it
applies to said question of law arising in any assessment pending before the
Commissioner until the decision of the High Court or of the Appellate Tribunal is
reversed or modified.
(2) In case the decision of High Court or the Appellate Tribunal, referred
to in sub-section (1), is reversed or modified, the Commissioner may,
notwithstanding the expiry of period of limitation prescribed for making any
assessment or order, within a period of one year from the date of receipt of
decision, modify the assessment or order in which the said decision was applied
so that it conforms to the final decision.]
125. Assessment in relation to disputed property.— Where the ownership of
any property the income from which is chargeable to tax under this Ordinance is
in dispute in any Civil Court in Pakistan, an assessment order or amended
assessment order in respect of such income may be issued at any time within one
year after the end of the financial year in which the decision of the Court is made.
126. Evidence of assessment.— (1) The production of an assessment order
or a certified copy of an assessment order shall be conclusive evidence of the due
making of the assessment and, except in proceedings under Part III of this Chapter
relating to the assessment, that the amount and all particulars of the assessment
are correct.
(2) Any 2[order] of assessment or other document purporting to be made,
issued, or executed under this Ordinance may not be –
(a) quashed or deemed to be void or voidable for want of form; or
(b) affected by reason of any mistake, defect, or omission therein,
if it is, in substance and effect, in conformity with this Ordinance and the person
assessed, or intended to be assessed or affected by the document, is designated
in it according to common understanding.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2002.
The word “notice” substituted by the Finance Act, 2003.
