PART III
HEAD OF INCOME: INCOME FROM PROPERTY
15. Income from property.— (1) The rent received or receivable by a person
1[for] a tax year, other than rent exempt from tax under this Ordinance, shall be
chargeable to tax in that year under the head “Income from Property”.
(2) Subject to sub-section (3), “rent” means any amount received or
receivable by the owner of land or a building as consideration for the use or
occupation of, or the right to use or occupy, the land or building, and includes any
forfeited deposit paid under a contract for the sale of land or a building.
(3) This section shall not apply to any rent received or receivable by any
person in respect of the lease of a building together with plant and machinery and
such rent shall be chargeable to tax under the head “Income from Other Sources”.
2[(3A) Where any amount is included in rent received or receivable by any
person for the provision of amenities, utilities or any other service connected with
the renting of the building, such amount shall be chargeable to tax under the head
“Income from Other Sources”.]
(4) Subject to sub-section (5), where the rent received or receivable by a
person is less than the fair market rent for the property, the person shall be treated
as having derived the fair market rent for the period the property is let on rent in
the tax year.
(5) Sub-section (4) shall not apply where the fair market rent is included
in the income of the lessee chargeable to tax under the head “Salary”.
3[ ]
4[ ]
5[ ]
Substituted for the word “in” by the Finance Act, 2003.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Sub-section (6) omitted by the Finance Act, 2013. The omitted sub-section (6) read as follows:
“(6) Income under this section shall be liable to tax at the rate specified in Division VI of Part
I of the First Schedule.”
Sub-section (7) omitted by the Finance Act, 2013. The omitted sub-section (6) read as follows:
“(7) the provisions of sub-section (1), shall not apply in respect of a taxpayer who—
(i) is an individual or association of persons;
(ii) derives income chargeable to tax under this section not exceeding Rs. 150,000 in a
tax year; and
(iii) does not derive taxable income under any other head.”
Clause (6) inserted by the Finance Act, 2016.
1[ ]
2[ ]
3[ ]
4[15A. Deductions in computing income chargeable under the head
“Income from Property”.— (1) In computing the income of a 5[ ] 6[person]
chargeable to tax under the head “Income from Property” for a tax year, a
deduction shall be allowed for the following expenditures or allowances, namely:-
(a) In respect of repairs to a building, an allowance equal to one-fifth of
the rent chargeable to tax in respect of the building for the year,
computed before any deduction allowed under this section;
(b) any premium paid or payable by the 7[ ] 8[person] in the year to insure
the building against the risk of damage or destruction;
(c) any local rate, tax, charge or cess in respect of the property or the rent
from the property paid or payable by the 9[ ] 10[person] to any local
authority or government in the year, not being any tax payable under
this Ordinance;
(d) any ground rent paid or payable by the 11[ ] 12[person] in the year in
respect of the property;
(e) any profit paid or payable by the 13[ ] 14[person] in the year on any
money borrowed including by way of mortgage, to acquire, construct,
renovate, extend or reconstruct the property;
1 Clause (6) omitted by the Finance Act, 2021. The omitted clause read as follows:
“(6) Income under this section derived by an individual or an association of persons shall be liable
to tax at the rate specified in Division VIA of Part I of the First Schedule.”
Clause (7) inserted by the Finance Act, 2016.
3 Clause (7) omitted by the Finance Act, 2021. The omitted clause read as follows:
“(7) The provisions of sub-section (1), shall not apply in respect of an individual or association of
persons who derive income chargeable to tax under this section not exceeding two hundred
thousand rupees in a tax year and does not derive taxable income under any other head.”
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2013.
The word “person” substituted by the Finance Act, 2016.
6 The word “company” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
The word “person” substituted by the Finance Act, 2016.
8 The word “company” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
The word “person” substituted by the Finance Act, 2016.
10 The word “company” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
The word “person” substituted by the Finance Act, 2016.
12 The word “company” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
The word “person” substituted by the Finance Act, 2016.
14 The word “company” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
(f) where the property has been acquired, constructed, renovated,
extended, or reconstructed by the 1[ ] 2[person] with capital contributed
by the House Building Finance Corporation or a scheduled bank under
a scheme of investment in property on the basis of sharing the rent
made by the Corporation or bank, the share in rent and share towards
appreciation in the value of property (excluding the return of capital, if
any) from the property paid or payable by the 3[ ] 4[person] to the said
Corporation or the bank in the year under that scheme;
(g) where the property is subject to mortgage or other capital charge, the
amount of profit or interest paid on such mortgage or charge;
5[(h) any expenditure, not exceeding 6[four] per cent of the rent chargeable
to tax in respect of the property for the year computed before any
deduction allowed under this section, paid or payable by the 7[ ]
8[person] in the year wholly and exclusively for the purpose of deriving
rent chargeable to tax under the head, “Income from Property”
including administration and collection charges;”]
(i) any expenditure paid or payable by the 9[ ] 10[person] in the tax year
for legal services acquired to defend the 11[ ] 12[persons]’s title to the
property or any suit connected with the property in a court; and
(j) where there are reasonable grounds for believing that any unpaid rent
in respect of the property is irrecoverable, an allowance equal to the
unpaid rent where—
(i) the tenancy was bona fide, the defaulting tenant has vacated
the property or steps have been taken to compel the tenant to
vacate the property and the defaulting tenant is not in
occupation of any other property of the 13[ ] 14[person];
The word “person” substituted by the Finance Act, 2016.
2 The word “company” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
The word “person” substituted by the Finance Act, 2016.
4 The word “company” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
Clause (h) substituted by the Finance Act, 2015. The substituted (h) read as follows:-
“(h) any expenditure (not exceeding six per cent of the rent chargeable to tax in respect of the
property for the year computed before any deduction allowed under this section) paid or
payable by the person in the year for the purpose of collecting the rent due in respect of
the property;”
6 The word “six” substituted by “four” through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
The word “person” substituted by the Finance Act, 2016.
8 The word “company” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
The word “person” substituted by the Finance Act, 2016.
10 The word “company” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
The word “person” substituted by the Finance Act, 2016.
12 The word “company” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
The word “person” substituted by the Finance Act, 2016.
14 The word “company” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
(ii) the 1[ ] 2[persons] has taken all reasonable steps to institute
legal proceedings for the recovery of the unpaid rent or has
reasonable grounds to believe that legal proceedings would be
useless; and
(iii) the unpaid rent has been included in the income of the 3[ ]
4[persons] chargeable to tax under the head “Income from
Property” for the tax year in which the rent was due and tax has
been duly paid on such income.
(2) Where any unpaid rent allowed as a deduction under clause (j) of
sub-section (1) is wholly or partly recovered, the amount recovered shall be
chargeable to tax in the tax year in which it is recovered.
(3) Where a person has been allowed a deduction for any expenditure
incurred in deriving rent chargeable to tax under the head “Income from Property”
and the person has not paid the liability or a part of the liability to which the
deduction relates within three years of the end of the tax year in which the
deduction was allowed, the unpaid amount of the liability shall be chargeable to
tax under the head “Income from Property” in the first tax year following the end of
the three years.
(4) Where an unpaid liability is chargeable to tax as a result of the
application of sub-section (3) and the person subsequently pays the liability or a
part of the liability, the person shall be allowed a deduction for the amount paid in
the tax year in which the payment is made.
(5) Any expenditure allowed to a person under this section as a
deduction shall not be allowed as a deduction in computing the income of the
person chargeable to tax under any other head of income.
(6) The provisions of section 21 shall apply in determining the
deductions allowed to a person under this section in the same manner as they
apply in determining the deductions allowed in computing the income of a person
chargeable to tax under the head “Income from Business”.]
5[ ]
6[ ]
The word “person” substituted by the Finance Act, 2016.
2 The word “company” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
The word “person” substituted by the Finance Act, 2016.
4 The word “company” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
New sub-section (7) added by Finance Act, 2019
6 Sub-section (7) omitted by the Finance Act, 2021. The omitted sub-section read as follows:
16. Non-adjustable amounts received in relation to buildings.— (1) Where
the owner of a building receives from a tenant an amount which is not adjustable
against the rent payable by the tenant, the amount shall be treated as rent
chargeable to tax under the head “Income from Property” in the tax year in which
it was received and the following nine tax years in equal proportion.
(2) Where an amount (hereinafter referred to as the “earlier amount”)
referred to in sub-section (1) is refunded by the owner to the tenant on termination
of the tenancy before the expiry of ten years, no portion of the amount shall be
allocated to the tax year in which it is refunded or to any subsequent tax year
except as provided for in sub-section (3).
(3) Where the circumstances specified in sub-section (2) occur and the
owner lets out the building or part thereof to another person (hereinafter referred
to as the “succeeding tenant”) and receives from the succeeding tenant any
amount (hereinafter referred to as the “succeeding amount”) which is not
adjustable against the rent payable by the succeeding tenant, the succeeding
amount as reduced by such portion of the earlier amount as was charged to tax
shall be treated as rent chargeable to tax under the head “Income from Property”
as specified in sub-section (1).
1[ ]
“(7) Notwithstanding sub-section (6) of section 15, the provisions of this section shall apply to
an individual or an association of persons,6[ ] who opts to pay tax at the rate specified in
Division I of Part I of the First Schedule.”
Section 17 omitted by the Finance Act, 2006. The omitted section 17 read as follows:
“17. Deductions in computing income chargeable under the head “Income from
Property”.- (1) In computing the income of a person chargeable to tax under the head “Income from
Property” for a tax year, a deduction shall be allowed for the following expenditures or allowances,
namely:–
(a) In respect of repairs to a building, an allowance equal to one-fifth of the rent chargeable to tax in respect
of the building for the year, computed before any deduction allowed under this section;
(b) any premium paid or payable by the person in the year to insure the building against the risk
of damage or destruction;
(c) any local rate, tax, charge, or cess in respect of the property or the rent from the property paid
or payable by the person to any local authority or government in the year, not being any tax
payable under this Ordinance;
(d) any ground rent paid or payable by the person in the year in respect of the property;
(e) any profit paid or payable by the person in the year on any money borrowed including by way
of mortgage, to acquire, construct, renovate, extend, or reconstruct the property;
(f) where the property has been acquired, constructed, renovated, extended, or reconstructed by
the person with capital contributed by the House Building Finance Corporation or a scheduled
bank under a scheme of investment in property on the basis of sharing the rent made by the
Corporation or bank, the share in rent and share towards appreciation in the value of property
(excluding the return of capital, if any) from the property paid or payable by the person to the
said Corporation or the bank in the year under that scheme;
(fa) where the property is subject to mortgage or other capital charge, the amount of profit or interest
paid on such mortgage or charge;
(g) any expenditure (not exceeding six per cent of the rent chargeable to tax in respect of the
property for the year computed before any deduction allowed under this section) paid or
payable by the person in the year for the purpose of collecting the rent due in respect of the
property;
