PART VI
REFUNDS
170. Refunds.— (1) A taxpayer who has paid tax in excess of the amount which
the taxpayer is properly chargeable under this Ordinance may apply to the
Commissioner for a refund of the excess.
1[(1A) Where any advance or loan, to which sub-clause (e) of clause (19) of
section 2 applies, is repaid by a taxpayer, he shall be entitled to a refund of the
tax, if any, paid by him as a result of such advance or loan having been treated as
dividend under the aforesaid provision.]
(2) An application for a refund under sub-section (1) shall be –
(a) made in the prescribed form;
(b) verified in the prescribed manner; and
(c) made within 2[three] years of the later of -
(i) the date on which the Commissioner has issued the
assessment order to the taxpayer for the tax year to which
the refund application relates; or
(ii) the date on which the tax was paid.
(3) Where the Commissioner is satisfied that tax has been overpaid, the
Commissioner shall —
(a) apply the excess in reduction of any other tax due from the
taxpayer under this Ordinance;
(b) apply the balance of the excess, if any, in reduction of any
outstanding liability of the taxpayer to pay other taxes; and
(c) refund the remainder, if any, to the taxpayer.
(4) The Commissioner shall, within 3[sixty] days of receipt of a refund
application under sub-section (1), serve on the person applying for the refund an
order in writing of the decision 4[after providing the taxpayer an opportunity of being
heard].
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
The word “two” substituted by the Finance Act, 2016.
The word “forty five” substituted by the Finance Act, 2009.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
1[(5) A person aggrieved by—
(a) an order passed under sub-section (4); or
(b) the failure of the Commissioner to pass an order under sub-
section (4) within the time specified in that sub-section,
may prefer an appeal under Part III of this Chapter.]
2[(6) The Board may make rules regulating procedure for expeditious
processing and automatic payment of refunds through centralized processing
system with effect from a date to be notified by the Board.]
3[170A. Electronic processing and electronic issuance of Refunds by the
Board.—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 170 of this Ordinance,
commencing from tax year 2021, the Board may process and issue refund to the
taxpayer who has filed the return of income without requiring refund application by
the taxpayer to the extent of tax credit verified by the Board’s computerized system
as may be prescribed. The refund amount sanctioned under this section shall be
electronically transferred in the taxpayer’s notified bank account.]
171. Additional payment for delayed refunds.—(1) Where a refund due to a
taxpayer is not paid within three months of the date on which it becomes due, the
Commissioner shall pay to the taxpayer a further amount by way of compensation
at the rate of 4[ 5[KIBOR plus 0.5 per cent] ] per annum of the amount of the refund
computed for the period commencing at the end of the three month period and
ending on the date on which it was paid 6[:]
7[Provided that where there is reason to believe that a person has claimed
the refund which is not admissible to him, the provision regarding the payment of
such additional amount shall not apply till the investigation of the claim is
completed and the claim is either accepted or rejected.]
(2) For the purposes of this section, a refund shall be treated as having
become due —
Sub-section (5) substituted by the Finance Act, 2003. The substituted sub-section (5) read as follows:
“(5) A person dissatisfied with a decision referred to in sub-section (4) may challenge the
decision only under Part III of this Chapter.”
2 New sub-section (6) added through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June,2020
Section 170A inserted by the Finance Act, 2021.
The word “KIBOR” substituted by the Finance Act, 2012.
The word “fifteen” substituted by Finance Act, 2015.
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2009.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2009.
(a) in the case of a refund required to be made in consequence of
an order on an appeal to the Commissioner (Appeals), an
appeal to the Appellate Tribunal, a reference to the High Court
or an appeal to the Supreme Court, on the date of receipt of
such order by the Commissioner; 1[or]
(b) in the case of a refund required to be made as a consequence
of a revision order under section 2[122A], on the date the order
is made by the Commissioner; or
(c) in any other case, on the date the refund order is made.
3[Explanation.—For the removal of doubt, it is clarified that
where a refund order is made on an application under sub-
section (1) of section 170, for the purpose of compensation, the
refund becomes due from the date refund order is made and not
from the date the assessment of income treated to have been
made by the Commissioner under section 120.]
4[171A. Payment of refund through income tax refund bonds.- (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 170 and 171, the income tax
refunds payable under this Ordinance may also be paid through income tax refund
bonds to be issued by FBR Refund Settlement Company Limited, in book-entry
form through an establishment licensed by the Securities and Exchange
Commission of Pakistan as a central depository under the Securities Act, 2015 (III
of 2015), in lieu of payment to be made through issuance of cheques or bank debit
advice.
(2) The Board shall issue a promissory note to FBR Refund Settlement
Company Limited, hereinafter referred to as the company, incorporating the details
of refund claimants and the amount of refund determined as payable to each for
issuance of income tax refund bonds, hereinafter referred to as the bonds, of the
same amount.
(3) The bonds shall be issued in value in multiples of one hundred
thousand rupees.
(4) The bonds so issued have maturity period of three years and shall
bear annual simple profit at ten percent.
(5) The bonds shall be traded freely in the country’s secondary markets.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Substituted for the figure “135” by the Finance Act, 2003.
Added by the Finance Act, 2013.
New Section 171A inserted through Finance Act, 2019.
(4) The bonds shall be approved security for calculating the statutory
liquidity reserve.
(5) The bonds shall be accepted by the banks as collateral.
(6) There shall be no compulsory deduction of Zakat against bonds and
Sahib-e-Nisab may pay Zakat voluntarily according to Shariah.
(7) After period of maturity, the company shall return the promissory note
to the Board and the Board shall make the payment of amount due
under the bonds, along with profit due, to the bond holders.
(8) The bonds shall be redeemable in the manner as in sub-section (9)
before maturity only at the option of the Board along with simple profit
payable at the time of redemption in the light of general or specific
policy to be formulated by the Board.
(9) The refund under sub-section (1) shall be paid in the aforesaid manner
to the claimants who opt for payment in such manner.
(10) The Federal Government may notify procedure to regulate the
issuance, redemption and other matters relating to the bonds, as may
be required.]
