PART IV
AGREEMENTS FOR THE AVOIDANCE OF DOUBLE TAXATION
AND PREVENTION OF FISCAL EVASION
107. Agreements for the avoidance of double taxation and prevention of
fiscal evasion. —1[2[(1) The Federal Government may enter into a tax treaty, a
tax information exchange agreement, a multilateral convention, an inter-
governmental agreement or similar agreement or mechanism for the avoidance of
double taxation 3[or assistance in the recovery of taxes] or for the exchange of
information for the prevention of fiscal evasion or avoidance of taxes including
automatic 4[and spontaneous] exchange of information with respect to taxes on
income imposed under this Ordinance or any other law for the time being in force
and under the corresponding laws in force in that country and may, by notification
in the official Gazette, make such provisions as may be necessary for
implementing the said instruments.”;] and]
5[“(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law to the contrary,
the Board shall have the powers to obtain and collect information when solicited
by another country under a tax treaty, a tax information exchange agreement, a
multilateral convention, an inter-governmental agreement, a similar arrangement
or mechanism.]
6[(1B) Notwithstanding the provisions of the Freedom of Information
Ordinance, 2002 (XCVI of 2002), 7[subject to clause (a) of sub-section (3) of
section 216 of this Ordinance] any information received or supplied, and any
The sub-section (1) substituted by Finance Act, 2015. Substituted sub-section (1) read as follows:-
“(1) The Federal Government may enter into an agreement with the government of a foreign country
for the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income
imposed under this Ordinance and under the corresponding laws in force in that country, and may, by
notification in the official Gazette make such provisions as may be necessary for implementing the
agreement.”
Sub-section (1) substituted by the Finance Act, 2016. The substituted sub-section (1) reads as
follows:-
“(1) The Federal Government may enter into an agreement, bilateral or multilateral with the
government or governments of foreign countries or tax jurisdictions for the avoidance of double
taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion and exchange of information including automatic
exchange of information with respect to taxes on income imposed under this Ordinance or any
other law for the time being in force and under the corresponding laws in force in that country,
and may, by notification in the official Gazette, make such provisions as may be necessary for
implementing the agreement.”
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2021.
4 The words “and spontaneous” inserted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2015
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2015
The words inserted by the Finance Act, 2019.
concomitant communication or correspondence made, under a tax treaty, a tax
information exchange agreement, a multilateral convention, a similar arrangement
or mechanism, shall be confidential 1[ ].
(2) 2[Subject to section 109, where] any agreement is made in
accordance with sub-section (1), the agreement and the provisions made by
notification for implementing the agreement shall, notwithstanding anything
contained in any law for the time being in force, have effect in so far as they provide
for 3[at least one of the following] –
(a) relief from the tax payable under this Ordinance;
(b) the determination of the Pakistan-source income of non-
resident persons;
(c) where all the operations of a business are not carried on within
Pakistan, the determination of the income attributable to
operations carried on within and outside Pakistan, or the income
chargeable to tax in Pakistan in the hands of non-resident
persons, including their agents, branches, and permanent
establishments in Pakistan;
(d) the determination of the income to be attributed to any resident
person having a special relationship with a non-resident person;
and
(e) the exchange of information for the prevention of fiscal evasion
or avoidance of taxes on income chargeable under this
Ordinance and under the corresponding laws in force in that
other country.
(3) Notwithstanding anything4[contained] in sub-sections (1) or (2), any
agreement referred to in sub-section (1) may include provisions for the relief from
tax for any period before the commencement of this Ordinance or before the
making of the agreement.
The expression “subject to sub-section (3) of section 216” omitted by the Finance Act, 2016
The word “where” substituted by the Finance Act, 2018.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2016.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2016.
