PART III
ASSOCIATIONS OF PERSONS
92. Principles of taxation of associations of persons.—(1) 1[ ] An association
of persons shall be liable to tax separately from the members of the association and
2[where the association of persons has paid tax the] amount received by a member
of the association in the capacity as member out of the income of the association
shall be exempt from tax3[:]
4[Provided that if at least one member of the association of persons is
a company, the share of such company or companies shall be excluded for
the purpose of computing the total income of the association of persons and
the company or the companies shall be taxed separately, at the rate
applicable to the companies, according to their share5[: ]
Provided further that the share of a member of an association of
persons having turnover of three hundred million rupees or above during the
tax year or any of the preceding tax years shall not be exempt if financial
statements duly audited by a firm of Chartered Accountants as defined under
the Chartered Accountants Ordinance, 1961 (X of 1961), or a firm of Cost
and Management Accountants as defined under the Cost and Management
Accountants Act, 1966 (XIV of 1966) have not been filed along with return
of income by the association of persons to whom he is a member:]
6[Explanation.– For removal of doubt it is clarified that if the income of
association of persons is exempt and no tax is payable under the Ordinance
due to this exemption, the share received in the capacity as member out of
the income of the association shall remain exempt.]
7[ ]
8[ ]
9[ ]
The words, brackets, figure and comma “Subject to sub-section (2)” omitted by the Finance Act, 2007.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Full stop substituted by a colon by the Finance Act, 2014.
Added by the Finance Act, 2014.
Full stop substituted and new proviso inserted by the Finance Act, 2024.
Explanation added by the Finance Act, 2022.
Sub-section (2) omitted by the Finance Act, 2007. The omitted sub-section (2) read as follows:
“ (2) Sub-section (1) shall not apply to an association of persons that is a professional firm prohibited
from incorporating by any law or the rules of the body regulating the profession.”
Sub-section (3) omitted by the Finance Act, 2007. The omitted sub-section (3) read as follows:
“(3) An association of persons to which subsection (2) applies shall not be liable to tax and the income
of the association shall be taxed to the members in accordance with section 93”.
Sub-section (4) omitted by the Finance Act, 2007. The omitted sub-section (4) read as follows:
1[ ]
2[ ]
