PART I
GEOGRAPHICAL SOURCE OF INCOME
101. Geographical source of income. — (1) Salary shall be Pakistan-source
income to the extent to which the salary —
(a) is received from any employment exercised in Pakistan,
wherever paid; or
(b) is paid by, or on behalf of, the Federal Government, a Provincial
Government, or a 1[Local Government] in Pakistan, wherever
the employment is exercised.
(2) Business income of a resident person shall be Pakistan-source
income to the extent to which the income is derived from any business carried on
in Pakistan.
(3) Business income of a non-resident person shall be Pakistan-source
income to the extent to which it is directly or indirectly attributable to –
(a) a permanent establishment of the non-resident person in
Pakistan;
(b) sales in Pakistan of goods merchandise of the same or similar
kind as those sold by the person through a permanent
establishment in Pakistan; 2[ ]
(b) "holder of public office" means a person as defined in the Voluntary Declaration of Domestic
Assets Act, 2018;
(c) "industrial undertaking" means a company being a new industrial undertaking setup for the
purpose of this section and is not established by the splitting up or reconstruction or reconstitution
of an undertaking already in existence or by transfer of machinery or plant from an existing
industrial undertaking established in Pakistan;
(d) "investment" means investment in equity and does not include borrowed funds and
investment in land; and
(e) "modernization" includes acquisition or upgradation of IT hardware, software and IT
services.";
The words “local authority” substituted by the Finance Act, 2008.
The word “or” omitted by the Finance Act, 2003.
(c) other business activities carried on in Pakistan of the same or
similar kind as those effected by the non-resident through a
permanent establishment in Pakistan 1[; or]
2[(d) any business connection in Pakistan 3[; or]
4[(e) import of goods, whether or not the title to the goods passes outside
Pakistan, if the import is part of an overall arrangement for the supply of
goods, installation, construction, assembly, commission, guarantees
or supervisory activities and all or principal activities are undertaken
or performed either by the associates of the person supplying the goods
or its permanent establishment, whether or not the goods are imported
in the name of the person, associate of the person or any other person.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubt, it is clarified that where the
income is subject to taxation under sections 5A, 5AA, 6, 7 and 7A, the income
shall not be chargeable to tax under the head income from business.”]
5[(3A) For the purposes of clause (d) of sub-section (3), business connection in
Pakistan shall include “significant economic presence in Pakistan” of a non-
resident.
(3B) significant economic presence in Pakistan shall mean –
(a) transaction in respect of any goods, services or property carried out
by a non-resident with any person in Pakistan including provision of
download of data or software in Pakistan, if the aggregate of payments
arising from such transaction or transactions during the tax year
exceeds such amount as may be prescribed; and
(b) systematic and continuous soliciting of business activities or engaging
in interaction through digital means with such number of users in
Pakistan as may be prescribed, irrespective of whether or not —
(i) the agreement for such transactions or activities is signed in
Pakistan;
(ii) the non-resident has a residence or place of business in
Pakistan; or
(iii) the non-resident renders services in Pakistan:
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2018.
Added by the Finance Act, 2018.
Sub-sections (3A) and (3B) added by the Finance Act, 2024.
Provided that only so much of income as is attributable to the
transactions or activities referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) shall be
deemed to accrue or arise from a business connection in Pakistan.]
1[(4) Where the business of a non-resident person comprises the rendering of
independent services (including professional services and the services of
entertainers and sports persons), the Pakistan-source business income of the
person shall include [in addition to any amounts treated as Pakistan-source income
under sub-section (3)] any remuneration derived by the person where the
remuneration is paid by a resident person or borne by a permanent establishment
in Pakistan of a non-resident person.]
(5) Any gain from the disposal of any asset or property used in deriving
any business income referred to in sub-section (2), (3) or (4) shall be Pakistan-
source income.
(6) A dividend shall be Pakistan-source income if it is 2[—]
3[( a) paid by a resident company; or]
4[(b) dividend as per provisions of sub-clause (f) of clause (19) of
section 2.]
(7) Profit on debt shall be Pakistan-source income if it is —
(a) paid by a resident person, except where the profit is payable in
respect of any debt used for the purposes of a business carried
on by the resident outside Pakistan through a permanent
establishment; or
(b) borne by a permanent establishment in Pakistan of a non-
resident person.
(8) A royalty shall be Pakistan-source income if it is —
Sub-section (4) substituted by the Finance Act, 2003. The substituted sub-section (4) read as
follows: -
“(4) Where the business of a non-resident person comprises the rendering of independent
services (including professional services and the services of entertainers and sports-persons), the
Pakistan-source business income of the person shall include (in addition to any amounts treated as
Pakistan-source income under sub-section (3)) any remuneration derived by the person where –
(a) the remuneration is paid by a resident person or borne by a permanent
establishment in Pakistan of a non-resident; person; and
(b) the aggregate gross amount (before deduction of expenses) of the
remuneration is sixty thousand rupees or more.”
The words and full stop “paid by a resident company.” substituted by the Finance Act, 2012.
Added by the Finance Act, 2012.
Added by the Finance Act, 2012.
(a) paid by a resident person, except where the royalty is payable
in respect of any right, property, or information used, or services
utilised for the purposes of a business carried on by the resident
outside Pakistan through a permanent establishment; or
(b) borne by a permanent establishment in Pakistan of a non-
resident person.
(9) Rental income shall be Pakistan-source income if it is derived from
the lease of immovable property in Pakistan whether improved or not, or from any
other interest in or over immovable property, including a right to explore for, or
exploit, natural resources in Pakistan.
(10) Any gain from the alienation of any property or right referred to in sub-
section (9) or from the alienation of any share in a company the assets of which
consist wholly or principally, directly or indirectly, of property or rights referred to in
sub-section (9) shall be Pakistan-source income.
(11) A pension or annuity shall be Pakistan-source income if it is paid by
a resident or borne by a permanent establishment in Pakistan of a non-resident
person.
(12) A technical fee shall be Pakistan-source income if it is –
(a) paid by a resident person, except where the fee is payable in
respect of services utilised in a business carried on by the resident
outside Pakistan through a permanent establishment; or
(b) borne by a permanent establishment in Pakistan of a non-
resident person.
1[(12A) A fee for offshore digital services shall be Pakistan- source income, if
it is –
(a) paid by a resident person, except where the fee is payable in respect
of services utilised in a business carried on by the resident
outside Pakistan through a permanent establishment; or
(b) borne by a permanent establishment in Pakistan of a non-
resident person.]
(13) Any gain arising on the disposal of shares in a resident company shall
be Pakistan-source income.
2[(13A).Any amount paid on account of insurance or re-insurance premium
by an insurance company to an overseas insurance or re-insurance company shall
be deemed to be Pakistan source income.]
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2018.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2008.
(14) Any amount not mentioned in the preceding sub-sections shall be
Pakistan-source income if it is paid by a resident person or borne by a permanent
establishment in Pakistan of a non-resident person.
(15) Where an amount may be dealt with under sub-section (3) and under
another sub-section (other than sub-section (14)), this section shall apply—
(a) by first determining whether the amount is Pakistan-source
income under that other sub-section; and
(b) if the amount is not Pakistan-source income under that sub-
section, then determining whether it is Pakistan-source income
under sub-section (3).
(16) An amount shall be foreign-source income to the extent to which it is
not Pakistan-source income.
1[101A. Gain on disposal of assets outside Pakistan.— (1) Any gain from the
disposal or alienation outside Pakistan of an asset located in Pakistan of a non-
resident company shall be Pakistan-source.
(2) The gain under sub-section (1) shall be chargeable to tax at the rate
and in the manner as specified in sub-section (10).
(3) Where the asset is any share or interest in a non-resident
company, the asset shall be treated to be located in Pakistan, if ─
(a) the share or interest derives, directly or indirectly, its value
wholly or principally from the assets located in Pakistan; and
(b) shares or interest representing ten per cent or more of the
share capital of the non-resident company are disposed or
alienated.
(4) The share or interest, as mentioned in sub-section (3), shall be
treated to derive its value principally from the assets located in Pakistan, if
on the last day of the tax year preceding the date of transfer ofa share or an
interest, the value of such assets exceeds one hundred million Rupees and
1Inserted by the finance Act 2018.
represents at least fifty per cent of the value of all the assets owned by the non-
resident company.
(5) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 68, the value as
mentioned in sub-section (4) shall be the fair market value, as may be
prescribed, for the purpose of this section without reduction of liabilities.
(6) Where the entire assets by the non-resident company are not
located in Pakistan, the income of the non-resident company, from disposal
or alienation outside Pakistan of a share of, or interest in, such non-resident
company shall be treated to be located in Pakistan, to the extent it is
reasonably attributable to assets located in Pakistan and determined as may
be prescribed.
(7) Where the asset of a non-resident company derives, directly or
indirectly, its value wholly or principally from the assets located in Pakistan
and the non-resident company holds, directly or indirectly, such assets through a
resident company, such resident company shall, for the purposes of determination
of gain and tax thereon under sub-section (8)or, as the case may be, sub-section
(9), shall furnish to the Commissioner within sixty days of the transaction of
disposal or alienation of the asset by the non-resident company, the
prescribed information or documents, in a statement as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Commissioner may, by notice in writing, require the
resident company, to furnish information, documents and statement
within a period of less than sixty days as specified in the notice.
(8) The person acquiring the asset from the non-resident person shall
deduct tax from the gross amount paid as consideration for the asset at the rate of
ten percent of the fair market value of the asset and shall be paid to the
Commissioner by way of credit to the Federal Government through remittance to
the Government Treasury or deposit in an authorized branch of the State Bank of
Pakistan or the National Bank of Pakistan, within fifteen days of the payment to the
non-resident.
(9) The resident company as referred to in sub-section (7) shall collect
advance tax as computed in sub-section (10) from the non-resident company
within thirty days of the transaction of disposal or alienation of the asset by such
non-resident company:
Provided that where the tax has been deducted and paid by the
person acquiring the asset from the non-resident person under sub-
section (8), the said tax shall be treated as tax collected and paid under this
sub-section and shall be allowed a tax credit for that tax in computing the
tax under sub-section (10).
(10) The tax to be collected under sub-section (9) shall be the higher of ─
(a) 20% of A, where A – fair market value less cost of acquisition of the
asset; or
(b) 10% of the fair market value of the asset.
(11) Where tax has been paid under sub-section (8) or (9), no tax shall be
payable by the non-resident company in respect of gain under sub-section (8) of
section 22 or capital gains under section 37 or 37A.
(12) Where any gain is taxable under this section and also under any other
provision of this Ordinance, the said gain shall be taxable under other provision of
the Ordinance.]
