PART I
RETURNS
114. Return of income. — (1) Subject to this Ordinance, the following persons
are required to furnish a return of income for a tax year, namely:–
1[(a) every company;]
2[(ab) every person (other than a company) whose taxable income for the
year exceeds the maximum amount that is not chargeable to tax
under this Ordinance for the year;3[or]]
4[(ac) any non-profit organization as defined in clause (36) of section 2; 5[ ]
6[ ]
7[ ]
8[(ae) every person whose income for the year is subject to final taxation
under any provision of this Ordinance;]
Clause (a) substituted by the Finance Act, 2003. The substituted clause (a) read as follows:
“(a) Every company and any other person whose taxable income for the year exceeds the
maximum amount that is not chargeable to tax under this Ordinance for the year; and”
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2011.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2006.
The word “and” omitted by the Finance Act, 2011.
Clause (ad) Inserted by the Finance Act, 2006.
Clause (ad) omitted by the Finance Act, 2021. The omitted clause read as follows:
“(ad) any welfare institution approved under clause (58) of Part I of the Second Schedule;”
Added through Finance Act, 2020
1[(b) any person not covered by clause 2[(a), (ab), (ac) or (ad)] who,—
(i) has been charged to tax in respect of any of the two preceding
tax years;
(ii) claims a loss carried forward under this Ordinance for a tax
year;
(iii) owns immovable property with a land area of 3[five hundred]
square yards or more or owns any flat located in areas falling
within the municipal limits existing immediately before the
commencement of Local Government laws in the provinces; or
areas in a Cantonment; or the Islamabad Capital Territory4[;] ]
5[(iv) owns immoveable property with a land area of five hundred
square yards or more located in a rating area;]
6[(v) owns a flat having covered area of two thousand square feet or
more located in a rating area;]
7[(vi) owns a motor vehicle having engine capacity above 1000 CC;
8[ ] ]
9[(vii) has obtained National Tax Number10[; or] ]
Clause (b) substituted by the Finance Act, 2005. The substituted clause (b) read as follows:
(b) any person not covered by clause (a) or (ab) who –
(i) has been charged to tax in respect of any of the four preceding tax years;
(ii) claims a loss carried forward under this Ordinance for a tax year;
(iii) owns immovable property, with a land area of two hundred and fifty square yards or more,
located in areas falling in the limits of a Metropolitan/Municipal Corporation, a Cantonment
Board, or the Islamabad Capital Territory or owns any flat;
(iv) owns a motor vehicle (other than a motor cycle) in Pakistan;
(v) subscribes for a telephone including a mobile phone in Pakistan;
(vi) has undertaken foreign travel in the tax year other than travel by a non-resident person or
any travel for the purposes of the Haj, Umrah, or Ziarat; or
(vii) is member of a club where the monthly subscription exceeds five hundred rupees or the
admission fee exceeds twenty-five thousand rupees.
The letters and word “(a) or (ab)” substituted by the Finance Act, 2006.
3The words “two hundred and fifty” substituted by “five hundred” through Finance Act, 2019.
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2009.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2009.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2009.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2009.
The word “and” omitted by the Finance Act, 2011.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2009.
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2011.
1[(viii) is the holder of commercial or industrial connection of
electricity where the amount of annual bill exceeds rupees
2[five hundred thousand] 3[; 4[ ] ]
5[(ix) is 6[a resident person] registered with any chamber of
commerce and industry or any trade or business association
or any market committee or any professional body including
Pakistan Engineering Council, Pakistan Medical and Dental
Council, Pakistan Bar Council or any Provincial Bar Council,
Institute of Chartered Accountants of Pakistan or Institute of
Cost and Management Accountants of Pakistan 7[; or]
8[(x) 9[is a] resident person being an individual required to file foreign
income and assets statement under section 116A.]
10[(c) persons or classes of persons notified by the Board with the approval
of the Minister in-charge.]
11[(1A) Every individual whose income under the head ‘Income from
business’ exceeds rupees three hundred thousand but does not exceed rupees
12[four hundred thousand] in a tax year is also required to furnish return of income
from the tax year.]
13[(2) A return of income -
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2011.
The words “one million” substituted by the Finance Act, 2013.
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2013.
The word “or” omitted by the Finance Act, 2018.
Added by the Finance Act, 2013.
The words “a resident person” inserted by the Finance Act, 2014.
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2018.
Added by the Finance Act, 2018.
9 The word “every” substituted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
Clause (c) inserted by the Finance, Act 2021.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2011.
The words “three hundred and fifty thousand” substituted by the Finance Act, 2013.
Sub-section (2) substituted by the Finance Act, 2003. The substituted sub-section (2) read as follows:
“(2) A return of income –
(a) shall be in the prescribed form;
(b) shall state the information required by the form, including a declaration of the
records kept by the taxpayer;
(c) in the case of a person carrying on a business, shall include an income
statement, balance sheet, and any other document as may be prescribed for
the tax year; and
(d) shall be signed by the person or the person’s representative.”
(a) shall be in the prescribed form and shall be accompanied by
such annexures, statements or documents as may be
prescribed 1[:
Provided that the Board may prescribe different returns
for different classes of income or persons including persons
subject to final taxation;]
(b) shall fully state all the relevant particulars or information as
specified in the form of return, including a declaration of the
records kept by the taxpayer; 2[ ]
(c) shall be signed by the person, being an individual, or the
person’s representative where section 172 applies3[;] ]
4[(d) shall be accompanied with evidence of payment of due tax as
per return of income; 5[ ]
6[(e) shall be accompanied with a wealth statement as required
under section 116 7[; and]
8[(f) shall be accompanied with a foreign income and assets
statement as required under section 116A.]
9[(2A) A return of income filed electronically on the web or any magnetic
media or any other computer readable media as may be specified by the Board
shall also be deemed to be a return for the purpose of sub-section (1); and the
Board may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for determining
eligibility of the data of such returns and e-intermediaries who will digitise the data
of such returns and transmit the same electronically to the Income Tax Department
under their digital signatures10[and other matters relating to electronic filing of
returns, statements or documents, etc.]]
(3) The Commissioner may, by notice in writing, require a person, or a
person’s representative, as the case may be, to furnish a return of income by the
date specified in the notice for a period of less than twelve months, where -
1 Proviso added through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
The word “and” omitted by the Finance Act, 2011.
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2011.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2011.
The word “and” omitted by the Finance Act, 2018.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2011.
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2018.
Added by the Finance Act 2018.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2005.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2007.
(a) the person has died;
(b) the person has become bankrupt or gone into liquidation;
(c) the person is about to leave Pakistan permanently;
1[ ]
(e) the Commissioner otherwise considers it appropriate to require
such a return to be furnished.
(4) Subject to sub-section (5), the Commissioner may, by notice in writing,
require any person who, in the Commissioner’s opinion, is required to file a return
of income under this section for a tax year 2[or assessment year] but who has failed
to do so to furnish a return of income for that year within thirty days from the date
of service of such notice or such longer 3[or shorter] period as may be specified in
such notice or as the Commissioner may allow.
(5) A notice under sub-section (4) may be issued 4[in respect of one or
more] 5[of the] last five completed tax years 6[or assessment years] 7[:]
8[Provided that in case of a person who has not filed return for any
of the last five completed tax years, notice under sub-section (4) may be
issued in respect of one or more of the last ten completed tax years] 9[:
Provided further that the time-limitation provided under this sub-
section shall not apply if the Commissioner is satisfied on the basis of
reasons to be recorded in writing that a person who failed to furnish
his return has foreign income or owns foreign assets.]
Clause (d) omitted by the Finance Act, 2003. Earlier this was omitted by S.R.O. 633(I)/2002 dated
14.09.2002 which stands rescinded by SRO 608(I)/2003, dated 24.06.2003 with effect from
01.07.2003. The omitted clause (d) read as follows:
“(d) the person is otherwise about to cease carrying on business in Pakistan; or “
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2013.
The words “only in respect of the” substituted by Finance Act, 2003. Earlier these were substituted by
S.R.O. 633(I)/2002 dated 14.09.2002 which stands rescinded by SRO 608(I)/2003, dated
24.06.2003 with effect from 01.07.2003.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2005.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2004.
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2016.
Added by the Finance Act, 2016.
Added by the Finance Act, 2021.
1[(6) Subject to sub-section (6A), any person who, having furnished a
return, discovers any omission or wrong statement therein, may file revised return
subject to the following conditions, namely: —
(a) it is accompanied by the revised accounts or revised audited
accounts, as the case may be [:] 2[ ]
3[Provided that Commissioner may waive this condition if the
Commissioner is satisfied that filing of revised accounts or audited
accounts is not necessary;]
(b) the reasons for revision of return, in writing, duly signed, by the
taxpayers are filed with the return4[; 5[ ] ]
6[(ba) it is accompanied by approval of the Commissioner in writing for
revision of return; and]
7[(c) taxable income declared is not less than and loss declared is not more
than income or loss, as the case may be, determined by an order
issued under sections 121, 122, 122A, 8[ ] 129, 132, 133 or 221:-
Provided that if any of the above conditions is not fulfilled, the
return furnished shall be treated as an invalid return as if it had not
been furnished] 9[:]
Sub-section (6) substituted by the Finance Act, 2010. The substituted provision has been made effective
from 05.06.2010 by sub-clause (77) of clause 8 of the Finance Act, 2010. Earlier the substitution was
made through Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2009 which was re-promulgated as Finance
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2010 and remained effective till 05.06.2010. The substituted sub-section
(6) read as follows:
“(6) Subject to sub-section (6A), any person who, having furnished a return, discovers any omission or
wrong statement therein, may file revised return subject to the following conditions, namely:-
(a) it is accompanied by the revised accounts or revised audited accounts, as the case may
be; and
(b) the reasons for revision of return, in writing, duly signed, by the taxpayers are filed with
the return.”
The word “and” omitted by the Finance Act, 2012.
Added by the Finance Act, 2021.
Substituted by the Finance Act, 2012.
The word “and” omitted by the Finance Act, 2013.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2013.
Added by the Finance Act, 2012.
The expression “122C,” omitted by the Finance Act, 2017.
Substituted by Finance Act, 2015.
1[Provided further that the condition specified in clause (ba)
shall not apply if revised return is filed within sixty days of filing of
return:
Provided also that where the Commissioner has not made an
order of approval in writing, for revision of return, before the expiration
of sixty days from the date when the revision of return was sought, the
approval required under clause (ba) shall be deemed to have been
granted by the Commissioner, and condition specified in clause (ba)
shall not apply:
2[Provided also that condition specified in clause (ba) shall not
apply and the approval required thereunder shall be deemed to have
been granted by the Commissioner, if-
(a) the Commissioner has not made an order of approval in
writing, for revision of return, before the expiration of sixty days from
the date when the revision of return was sought; or
(b) taxable income declared is more than or the loss declared
is less than the income or loss, as the case may be, determined under
section 120] 3[:
“Provided also that the Commissioner shall grant approval in
case of a bonafide omission or wrong statement.]
4[(6A) If a taxpayer 5[files] a revised return voluntarily along with deposit of
the amount of tax short paid or amount of tax sought to be evaded along with the
default surcharge, whenever it comes to his notice, before receipt of notice under
sections 177 or sub-section(9) of 122, no penalty shall be recovered from him:
Provided that in case the taxpayer 6[deposits] the amount of tax as
pointed out by the Commissioner during the audit or before the issuance of
notice under sub-section (9) of section 122, he shall deposit the amount of
tax sought to be evaded, the default surcharge and twenty-five per cent of
the penalties leviable under the Ordinance along with the revised return:
Added by Finance Act, 2015.
Proviso substituted by the Finance Act, 2016. Substituted proviso reads as follows:-
“ Provided further that the mode and manner for seeking the revision shall be as prescribed by the Board.”
Proviso added through Finance Act, 2020
Added by the Finance Act, 2010.
The words “wishes to file” substituted by the Finance Act, 2011.
The words “wishes to deposit” substituted by the Finance Act, 2011.
Provided further that in case the taxpayer 1[revises] the return after
the issuance of a show cause notice under sub-section (9) of section 122,
he shall deposit the amount of tax sought to be evaded, default surcharge
and fifty per cent of the leviable penalties under the Ordinance along with
the revised return and thereafter, the show cause notice shall stand abated.]
(7) Every return purporting to be made or signed by, or on behalf of a
person shall be treated as having been duly made by the person or with the
person’s authority until the person proves the contrary.
2[ ]
3[114A. Business bank account.— (1) Every taxpayer shall declare to the
Commissioner the bank account utilized by the taxpayer for business transactions.
(2) Business bank account shall be declared through original or modified
registration form prescribed under section 181.]
The words “wishes to revise” substituted by the Finance Act, 2011.
2 New section 114A added through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
Section 114A substituted by the Finance Act, 2021. The substituted section read as follows:
“114A. Taxpayer’s profile.-(1) Subject to this Ordinance, the following persons shall furnish a profile,
namely:-
(a) every person applying for registration under section 181;
(b) every person deriving income chargeable to tax under the head, “Income from
business”;
(c) every person whose income is subject to final taxation;
(d) any non-profit organization as defined in clause (36) of section 2;
(e) any trust or welfare institution; or
(f) any other person prescribed by the Board.
(2) A taxpayer’s profile-
(a) shall be in the prescribed form and shall be accompanied by such annexures,
statements or documents as may be prescribed;
(b) shall fully state, in the specified form and manner, the relevant particulars of –
(i) bank accounts;
(ii) utility connections;
(iii) business premises including all manufacturing, storage or retail outlets
operated or leased by the taxpayer;
(iv) types of businesses; and
(v) such other information as may be prescribed;
(c) shall be signed by the person being an individual, or the person’s representative
where section 172 applies; and
(d) shall be filed electronically on the web prescribed by the Board.
(3) A taxpayer’s profile shall be furnished,-
(a) on or before the 31st day of December, 2020 in case of a person registered
under section 181 before the 30th day of September, 2020; and
(b) within ninety days registration in case of a person not registered under section
181 before the 30th day of September, 2020.
(4) A taxpayer’s profile shall be updated within ninety days of change in any of the relevant
particulars of information as mentioned in clause (b) of sub-section (2).]
1[114B. Powers to enforce filing of returns.— (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in any other law for the time being in force, the Board shall have the
powers to issue income tax general order in respect of persons who are not
appearing on active taxpayers’ list but are liable to file return under the provisions
of the Ordinance.
(2) The income tax general order issued under sub-section (1) may entail any
or all of the following consequences for the persons mentioned therein, namely:–
(a) disabling of mobile phones or mobile phone SIMS;
(b) discontinuance of electricity connection; 2[ ]
(c) discontinuance of gas connection3[; or
(d) restriction on foreign travel from the country for a citizen of Pakistan,
excluding persons holding National Identity Card for Overseas
Pakistanis (NICOP), minors, students, persons proceeding abroad for
Hajj or Umrah and such other classes of persons as notified by the
Board.]
(3) The Board or the Commissioner having jurisdiction over the person
mentioned in the income tax general order may order restoration of mobile phones,
mobile phone SIMS and connections of electricity and gas, in cases where he is
satisfied that —
(a) the return has been filed; or
(b) person was not liable to file return under the provisions of the
Ordinance.
(4) No person shall be included in the general order under sub-section (1)
unless following conditions have been met with, namely:–
(a) notice under sub-section (4) of section 114 has been issued;
(b) date of compliance of the notice under sub-section (4) of section 114
has elapsed; and
(c) the person has not filed the return.
(5) The action under this section shall not preclude any other action
provided under the provisions of the Ordinance.]
4[114C. Restriction on economic transactions by certain persons. — (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, —
New section 114B added through Finance Act, 2022.
The word “or” omitted by the Finance Act, 2024.
Full stop substituted and clause (d) added by the Finance Act, 2024.
Section 114C inserted by Finance Act, 2025.
(a) any application, by any ineligible person, for booking, purchase or
registration of a motor vehicle of the value exceeding the threshold given in
Fifteenth Schedule, shall not be accepted or processed by any manufacturer
of a motor vehicle or vehicle registering authority of Excise and Taxation
Department, as the case may be;
(b) any application or request by any ineligible person, to any authority
responsible for registering, recording or attesting transfer of any immovable
property, of the value exceeding the threshold given in Fifteenth Schedule,
shall not be accepted or processed by such authority;
(c) Any person authorized to open and maintain an account in respect of
securities, units of mutual fund or similar investment, shall not open an
account or maintain such account if the total investment by an ineligible
person in any such account exceeds the threshold specified in Fifteenth
Schedule; and
(d) a banking company shall not allow cash withdrawal from any of the bank
account of any person, exceeding the threshold as specified in Fifteenth
Schedule.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1), shall not apply on transactions
made by a non-resident person or a public company except that mentioned in
clause (d) of sub-section (1).
(3) The sources of investment and expenditure statement filed by the
person and sufficient resources mentioned in sub-section (5), shall not be
construed as nature and source of income for the purposes of section 111.
(4) For the purposes of this section, –
(a) “eligible person” shall mean a person who has filed –
(i) a return of income for the tax year immediately preceding
the year of transaction mentioned in sub-section (1) and
has sufficient resources in the wealth statement in case
of an individual, or financial statement in case of a
company or an association of persons, as the case may
be, for such transaction; or
(ii) sources of investment and expenditure statement
declaring sufficient resources and furnishing explanation
thereof for a particular purchase or investment
transaction covered in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of sub-
section (1):
Provided that in case of an individual, the eligible person
shall include his immediate family members.;
(b) “immediate family members” in respect of an individual, shall
include his parents, spouse and dependent children;
(c) “ineligible person” shall mean a person who is not an eligible
person as defined in clause (a) of this sub-section;
(d) “sources of investment and expenditure statement” shall mean
a declaration by a person filed on the Board‘s web portal,
specifying the sources of funds for making such transaction;
and
(e) ”sufficient resources” shall mean one hundred and thirty percent
of the cash and equivalent assets comprising cash
denominated in local or foreign currency, fair market value of
gold, net realizable value of stocks, bonds, receivables or any
other cash equivalent asset as may be prescribed, declared by
a person either in his sources of investment and expenditure
statement, or wealth statement filed for the latest tax year and
in the case of a company or association of persons, cash and
equivalent assets, declared in the financial statements attached
with the income tax return for the latest tax year:
Provided that where an asset mentioned in sub-section
(1), other than clause (d) of this sub-section, has been
purchased by way of exchange of capital assets already
declared in the wealth statement, or financial statement, or
sources of investment and expenditure statement, the disposal
of such capital assets shall be treated to be part of cash
equivalent assets to the extent of the value mentioned in the
agreement.
(5) All or any of the restrictions or limitations imposed on the ineligible
person under this section shall come into force on such date as the Federal
Government may, by notification in official Gazette, appoint with such reductions
and enhancements in the thresholds specified in the Fifteenth Schedule as
deemed appropriate.]
115. Persons not required to furnish a return of income. —1[ ]
Sub-section (1) and the proviso there under omitted by the Finance Act, 2013. The omitted sub-
section (1) and the proviso read as follows:
“(1) Where the entire income of a taxpayer in a tax year consists of income chargeable under
the head “Salary”, Annual Statement of Deduction of Income Tax from Salary, filed by the employer
1[ ]
(3) The following persons shall not be required to furnish a return of
income for a tax year solely by reason of 2[sub-clause (iii)3[, (iv),(v) and (vi)]] of
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 114 –
(a) A widow;
(b) an orphan below the age of twenty-five years;
(c) a disabled person; or
(d) in the case of ownership of immovable property, a non-resident
person.
4[ ]
5[ ]
6[ ]
7[ ]
of such taxpayer, in prescribed form, the same shall, for the purposes of this Ordinance, be treated
as a return of income furnished by the taxpayer under section 114:
Provided that where salary income, for the tax year is five hundred thousand
rupees or more, the taxpayer shall file return of income electronically in the prescribed
form and it shall be accompanied by the proof of deduction or payment of tax and wealth
statement as required under section 116.”
Sub-section (2) omitted by the Finance Act, 2004. Omitted sub-section (2) read as follows:
“(2) Clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall not apply to a person whose declared income for the
tax year, or whose last declared or assessed income, is less than two hundred thousand rupees.”
2The words, brackets and figures “sub-clauses (iii) through (vii)” substituted by the Finance Act, 2008.
3Inserted by the Finance Act, 2017
4Sub-section (4) omitted by Finance Act, 2020. The omitted sub-section (4) read as follows:
(4) Any person who is not obliged to furnish a return for a tax year because all the person’s income is subject
to final taxation under sections 5, 6, 7, 148, 151 and 152, sub-section (3) of section 153, sections 154, 156
and 156A, sub-section (3) of section 233 or sub-section (3) of section 234A shall furnish to the Commissioner
a statement showing such particulars relating to the person’s income for the tax year in such form and verified
in such manner as may be prescribed.
5Sub-section(4A) omitted through Finance Act, 2020. The omitted sub-section (4A) read as follows:
(4A) Any person who, having furnished a statement, discovers any omission or wrong statement
therein, he may, without prejudice to any other liability which he may incur under this Ordinance,
furnish a revised statement for that tax year, at any time within five years from the end of the
financial year in which the original statement was furnished.
6 Sub-section (4B) omitted by the Finance Act, 2010. The omitted sub-section (4B) read as follows:
“(4B) Every person (other than a company) filing statement under sub-section (4), falling
under final tax regime (FTR) and has paid tax amounting to twenty thousand rupees or more for the
tax year, shall file a wealth statement along with reconciliation of wealth statement.”
7Sub section (5) and (6) omitted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020 the omitted sub-
sections read as follows:
116. Wealth statement.— (1) 1[The] Commissioner may, by notice in writing,
require any person 2[being an individual] to furnish, on the date specified in the
notice, a statement (hereinafter referred to as the "wealth statement") in the
prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner giving particulars of —
(a) the person’s total 3[assets including foreign assets and liabilities
including foreign liabilities] as on the date or dates specified in such
notice;
(b) the total 4[assets including foreign assets and liabilities including
foreign liabilities] of the person’s spouse, minor children, and other
dependents as on the date or dates specified in such notice;
5[Explanation. – For removal of doubt, it is clarified that assets of spouse
shall only be included in the wealth statement of the person if the spouse is
dependent;]
(c) any assets 6[including foreign assets] transferred by the person
to any other person during the period or periods specified in
such notice and the consideration for the transfer; 7[ ]
(d) the total expenditures incurred by the person, and the person’s
spouse, minor children, and other dependents during the period
or periods specified in the notice and the details of such
expenditures 8[; and]
9[(e) the reconciliation statement of wealth.]
(5) Subject to sub-section (6), the Commissioner may, by notice in writing, require any person who,
in his opinion, is required to file a prescribed statement under this section for a tax year but who has failed to do so,
to furnish a prescribed statement for that year within thirty days from the date of service of such notice or such longer
period as may be specified in such notice or as he may, allow.
(6) A notice under sub-section (5) may be issued in respect of one or more of the last five
completed tax years.
The words, brackets, figure, comma and word “Subject to sub-section (2)”. The” substituted by the
Finance Act, 2007.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2013.
The words “assets and liabilities” substituted by the Finance Act, 2024.
The words “assets and liabilities” substituted by the Finance Act, 2024.
Explanation inserted by the Finance Act, 2024.
Words inserted by the Finance Act, 2024.
The word “and” omitted by the Finance Act, 2009.
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2009.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2009.
(2) Every resident taxpayer1[being an individual] filing a return of income
for any tax year2[ ] shall furnish a wealth statement3[and wealth reconciliation
statement] for that year along with such return 4[:]
5[Provided that every member of an association of persons 6[ ]
shall also furnish wealth statement and wealth reconciliation statement
for the year along with return of income of the association.]
7[8[ ] ]
9[(3) Where a person, who has furnished a wealth statement, discovers any
omission or wrong statement therein, he may, without prejudice to any liability
incurred by him under any provision of this Ordinance, furnish a revised wealth
statement 10[along with the revised wealth reconciliation and the reasons for filing
revised wealth statement,] 11[under intimation to the Commissioner in the
prescribed form and manner,]at any time before 12[the receipt of notice under sub-
section (9) of section 122, for the tax year to which it relates13[:]
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2011.
The words and comma “whose last declared or assessed income or the declared income for the year,
is one million rupees or more” omitted by the Finance Act, 2013. Note: This amendment shall be
effective for the tax year 2013 and onwards.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2009.
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2011.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2011.
The words and commas “ whose share from the income of such association of persons, before tax,
for the year is one million rupees or more” omitted by the Finance Act, 2013. Note: This amendment
shall be effective for the tax year 2013 and onwards.
Sub-section (2A) substituted by the Finance Act, 2011. The substituted sub-section (2A) read as
follows:
“(2A) Where a person files a return in response to a provisional assessment under section
122C, he shall furnish a wealth statement for that year along with that return and such wealth
statement shall be accompanied by a wealth reconciliation statement and an explanation of sources
of acquisition of assets specified therein.”
Section (2A) omitted by Finance Act 2017,the omitted section is read as under
“(2A) “Where a person, being an individual or an association of persons, files a return in response to
a provisional assessment order under section 122C, such return shall be accompanied by wealth
statement along with a wealth reconciliation statement and an explanation of source of acquisition
of assets specified therein in the case of an individual and wealth statements of all members in the
case of an association of persons and such wealth statements shall be accompanied by wealth
reconciliation statements and explanation of source of acquisition of assets specified therein.”
Added by the Finance Act, 2003.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2013.
11 The expressions inserted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
The expression “an assessment, for the tax year to which it relates, is made under sub-section (1)
or sub-section (4) of section 122”substituted by the Finance Act, 2017.
Full stop substituted by colon and provision and explanation inserted through Finance Act, 2020
dated 30th June, 2020
Provided that where the Commissioner is of the opinion that the revision
under this sub-section is not for the purpose of correcting a bona fide omission or
wrong statement, he may declare such revision as void through an order in writing
after providing an opportunity of being heard.
Explanation.- For the removal of doubt it is clarified that wealth statement
cannot be revised after the expiry of five years from the due date of filing of return
of income for that tax year.]
1[ ]
2[116A. Foreign income and assets statement.– (1) Every resident taxpayer
being an individual having foreign income of not less than ten thousand United
States dollars or having foreign assets with a value of not less than one hundred
thousand United States dollars shall furnish a statement, hereinafter referred to as
the foreign income and assets statement, in the prescribed form and verified in
the prescribed manner giving particulars of—
(a) the person’s total foreign assets and liabilities as on the last day of the
tax year;
(b) any foreign assets transferred by the person to any other person
during the tax year and the consideration for the said transfer; and
(c) complete particulars of foreign income, the expenditure derived during
the tax year and the expenditure wholly and necessarily for the
purposes of deriving the said income.
(2) The Commissioner may by a notice in writing require any person being
an individual who, in the opinion of the Commissioner on the basis of reasons to
be recorded in writing, was required to furnish a foreign income and assets
statement under sub-section (1) but who has failed to do so to furnish the foreign
income and assets statement on the date specified in the notice.]
117. Notice of discontinued business.— (1) Any person discontinuing a
business shall give the Commissioner a notice in writing to that effect within fifteen
days of the discontinuance.
(2) The person discontinuing a business shall, under the provisions of this
Ordinance or on being required by the Commissioner by notice, in writing, furnish
a return of income for the period commencing on the first day of the tax year in
which the discontinuance occurred and ending on the date of discontinuance and
this period shall be treated as a separate tax year for the purposes of this
Ordinance.
1 Sub section (4) omitted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June 2020 omitted sub-section read
as follows;
(4) Every person (other than a company5 [or an association of persons])filing statement under
sub-section (4) of section 115, falling under final tax regime (FTR) 6 [ ] shall file a wealth statement
along with reconciliation of wealth statement.]
2 Inserted by the Finance Act 2018.
(3) Where no notice has been given under sub-section (1) but the
Commissioner has reasonable grounds to believe that a business has
discontinued or is likely to discontinue, the Commissioner may serve a notice on
the person who has discontinued the business or is likely to discontinue the
business to furnish to the Commissioner within the time specified in the notice a
return of income for the period specified in the notice.
(4) A return furnished under this section shall be treated for all purposes
of this Ordinance as a return of income, including the application of Section 120.
118. Method of furnishing returns and other documents. — (1) A return of
income under section 114, 1[ ] 2[ ] 3[,] a wealth statement under section 116 4[or a
foreign income and assets statement under 116A, if applicable] shall be furnished
in the prescribed manner.
(2) A return of income 5[under section 114 6[ ] ] of a company shall be
furnished —
(a) in the case of a company with a tax year ending any time
between the first day of January and the thirtieth day of June,
on or before the thirty-first day of December next following the
end of the tax year to which the return relates; or
(b) in any other case, on or before the thirtieth day of September next
following the end of the tax year to which the return relates.
7[(2A) Where salary income for the tax year is five hundred thousand rupees
or more, the taxpayer shall file return of income electronically in the prescribed
form and it shall be accompanied by the proof of deduction or payment of tax and
wealth statement as required under section 116 8[or a foreign income and assets
statement under 116A, if applicable”] ] 9[:]
The words, figure and comma “an employer’s certificate under section 115,” omitted by the Finance
Act, 2013.
The expressions “ a statement required under sub-section (4) of section 115” omitted through
Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
The word ‘or” ssubstituted by Finance Act, 2018.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2018.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
The expressions “or a statement required under sub-section (4) of section 115” omitted through
Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2013.
Added the Finance Act, 2018.
Substituted by Finance Act, 2015
1[“Provided that the Board may amend the condition specified in this
sub-section or direct that the said condition shall not apply for a tax year.”;]
2[ * ]
3[(3) A return of income for any person (other than a company) 4[ ] 5[ ] shall
be furnished as per the following schedule, namely:—
6[(a) in the case of 7[ ] a return required to be filed through e-portal
in the case of a salaried individual, on or before the 8[30th day of
September] next following the end of the tax year to which the
statement or return relates; or]
(b) in the case of a return of income for any person (other than a
company), as described under clause (a), on or before the 30th
day of September next following the end of the tax year to which
the return relates.]
(4) A wealth statement shall be furnished by the due date specified in the
notice requiring the person to furnish such statement or, where the person is
required to furnish the wealth statement for a tax year under sub-section (2) of
section 116, by the due date for furnishing the return of income for that year.
Substituted by Finance Act, 2015
Inserted by the S.R.O. 791(I)/2015 dated 10.08.2015.
“ *Notification
In exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to sub-section (2A) of section 118 of the Income Tax
Ordinance, 2001 (XLIX of 2001), the Federal Government is pleased to direct that all individuals earning taxable
salary income shall be liable to file their Income Tax returns electronically from Tax Year 2015 onwards. The
condition of five hundred thousand rupees or more, as provided in the said sub-section shall not be applicable
until further orders.”]
Sub-section (3) substituted by the Finance Act, 2010. The substituted sub-section (3) read as follows:
“(3) A return of income for any person (other than a company), an employer certificate of an
individual or a statement required under sub-section (4) of section 115 shall be furnished on or before
the thirtieth day of September next following the end of the tax year to which the return, certificate or
statement relates.”
The words and comma “an Annual Statement of deduction of income tax from salary, filed by the
employer of an individual” omitted by the Finance Act, 2013.
The expressions “or a statement required under sub-section (4) of section 115” omitted through
Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
Clause (a) substituted by the Finance Act, 2013. The substituted clause (a) read as follows:
“(a) in the case of an Annual statement of deduction of income tax from salary, filed by the
employer of an individual, return of income through e-portal in the case of a salaried
person or a statement required under sub-section (4) of section 115, on or before the
31st day of August next following the end of the tax year to which the return, Annual
Statement of deduction of income tax from salary, filed by the employer or statement
relates.”
The expression “a statement required under sub-section (4) of section 115 or” omitted through
Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
8The expression “31stday of August” substituted through Finance Act, 2019.
(5) A return required to be furnished by a notice issued under section 117
shall be furnished by the due date specified in the notice.
(6) Where a taxpayer is not borne on the National Tax Number Register
and fails to file an application in the prescribed form and manner with the taxpayer’s
return of income 1[ ], such return 2[ ] shall not be treated as a return 3[ ] furnished
under this section.
119. Extension of time for furnishing returns and other documents.— (1) A
person required to furnish —
(a) a return of income under section 114 or 117;
4[ ]
5[ ]
(d) a wealth statement under section 116,
may apply, in writing, to the Commissioner for an extension of time to furnish the
return, 6[ ] or statement, as the case may be.
(2) An application under sub-section (1) shall be made by the due date
for furnishing the return of income, 7[ ] or 8[ ] statement to which the application
relates.
(3) Where an application has been made under sub-section (1) and the
Commissioner is satisfied that the applicant is unable to furnish the return of
income, 9[ ] or 10[ ] statement to which the application relates by the due date
because of —
(a) absence from Pakistan;
(b) sickness or other misadventure; or
(c) any other reasonable cause,
The words “or employer’s certificate” omitted by the Finance Act, 2013.
The words “or certificate” omitted by the Finance Act, 2013.
The words “or certificate” omitted by the Finance Act, 2013.
Clause (b) omitted by the Finance Act, 2013. The omitted clause (b) read as follows:
“(b) an employer’s certificate under section 115;”
5 Clause (c) omitted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020 the omitted clause read as
follows:” (c) a statement required under sub-section (4) of section 115; or”.
The word and comma “certificate,” omitted by the Finance Act, 2013.
The words and comma “employer’s certificate,” omitted by the Finance Act, 2013.
The word “wealth” omitted by the Finance Act, 2002
The words and comma “employer’s certificate,” omitted by the Finance Act, 2013.
The word “wealth” omitted by the Finance Act, 2002
the Commissioner may, by 1[order], in writing, grant the applicant an extension of
time for furnishing the return, 2[ ] or statement, as the case may be.
(4) An extension of time under sub-section (3) should not exceed fifteen
days from the due date for furnishing the return of income, employer’s certificate,
or 3[ ] statement, as the case may be, unless there are exceptional circumstances
justifying a longer extension of time4[:]
5[Provided that where the Commissioner has not granted extension for
furnishing return under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4), the Chief Commissioner
may on an application made by the taxpayer for extension or further extension, as
the case may be, grant extension or further extension for a period not exceeding
fifteen days unless there are exceptional circumstances justifying a longer
extension of time.]
6[ ]
(6) An extension of time granted under sub-section (3) shall not 7[, for the
purpose of charge of 8[default surcharge]under sub-section (1) of section
205,]change the due date for payment of income tax under section 137.
Substituted for the word “notice” by the Finance Act, 2002
The word and comma “certificate,” omitted by the Finance Act, 2013.
The word “wealth” omitted by the Finance Ordinance, 2002
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2017.
Added by the Finance Act, 2017.
Sub-section (5) omitted by the Finance Act, 2002. The omitted sub-section (5) read as follows:
“(5) An applicant dissatisfied with a decision under sub-section (3) may challenge the
decision only under the Part III of this Chapter.”
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2002
The words “additional tax” substituted by the Finance Act, 2010. The substituted provision has been
made effective from 05.06.2010 by sub-clause (77) of clause 8 of the Finance Act, 2010. Earlier the
substitution was made through Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2009 which was re-promulgated
as Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2010 and remained effective till 05.06.2010.
