PART III
ASSETS
75. Disposal and acquisition of assets.—(1) A person who holds an asset shall
be treated as having made a disposal of the asset at the time the person parts with
the ownership of the asset, including when the asset is —
(a) sold, exchanged, transferred or distributed; or
(b) cancelled, redeemed, relinquished, destroyed, lost, expired or
surrendered.
(2) The transmission of an asset by succession or under a will shall be
treated as a disposal of the asset by the deceased at the time asset is transmitted.
(3) The application of a business asset to personal use shall be treated as a
disposal of the asset by the owner of the asset at the time the asset is so applied.
3[(3A) Where a business asset is discarded or ceases to be used in
business, it shall be treated to have been disposed of.]
(4) A disposal shall include the disposal of a part of an asset.
(5) A person shall be treated as having acquired an asset at the time the
person begins to own the asset, including at the time the person is granted any right.
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
(6) The application of a personal asset to business use shall be treated
as an acquisition of the asset by the owner at the time the asset is so applied.
(7) In this section, -
“business asset” means an asset held wholly or partly for use in a
business, including stock-in-trade and a depreciable asset; and
“personal asset” means an asset held wholly for personal use.
1[75A. Purchase of assets through banking channel 2[or digital means].- (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, for the time being in force,
no person shall purchase-
(a) immovable property having fair market value greater than five million
Rupees; or
(b) any other asset having fair market value more than one million Rupees,
otherwise than by a crossed cheque drawn on a bank or through crossed
demand draft or crossed pay order or any other crossed banking
instrument 3[or through digital means] showing transfer of amount from
one bank account to another bank account.
(2) For the purposes of this section in case of immovable property, fair
market value means value notified by the Board under sub-section (4) of section
68 or value fixed by the provincial authority for the purposes of stamp duty,
whichever is higher.
(3) In case the transaction is not undertaken in the manner specified in
sub-section (1), -
(a) such asset shall not be eligible for any allowance under sections 22, 23,
24 and 25 of this Ordinance; and
(b) such amount shall not be treated as cost in terms of section 76 of this
Ordinance for computation of any gain on sale of such asset.]
76. Cost.—(1) Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, this section shall
establish the cost of an asset for the purposes of this Ordinance.
(2) Subject to sub-section (3), the cost of an asset purchased by a person
shall be the sum of the following amounts, namely:—
New section 75A inserted by the Finance Act, 2019.
Words inserted by the Finance Act, 2025.
Words inserted by the Finance Act, 2025.
(a) The total consideration given by the person for the asset,
including the fair market value of any consideration in kind
determined at the time the asset is acquired;
(b) any incidental expenditure incurred by the person in acquiring
and disposing of the asset; and
(c) any expenditure incurred by the person to alter or improve the
asset,
but shall not include any expenditure under clauses (b) and (c) that has been fully
allowed as a deduction under this Ordinance.
(3) The cost of an asset treated as acquired under sub-section (6) of
section 75 shall be the fair market value of the asset determined at the date it is
applied to business use.
(4) The cost of an asset produced or constructed by a person shall be the
total costs incurred by the person in producing or constructing the asset plus any
expenditure referred to 1[in] clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (2) incurred by the
person.
(5) Where an asset has been acquired by a person with a loan denominated
in a foreign currency and, before full and final repayment of the loan, there is an
increase or decrease in the liability of the person under the loan as expressed in
Rupees, the amount by which the liability is increased or reduced shall be added to or
deducted from the cost of the asset, as the case may be.
2[Explanation.-Difference, if any, on account of foreign currency fluctuation,
shall be taken into account in the year of occurrence for the purposes of
depreciation.]
(6) In determining whether the liability of a person has increased or
decreased for the purposes of sub-section (5), account shall be taken of the
person’s position under any hedging agreement relating to the loan.
(7) Where a part of an asset is disposed of by a person, the cost of the
asset shall be apportioned between the part of the asset retained and the part
disposed of in accordance with their respective fair market values determined at
the time the person acquired the asset.
(8) Where the acquisition of an asset by a person is the derivation of an
amount chargeable to tax, the cost of the asset shall be the amount so charged
plus any amount paid by the person for the asset.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Added by the Finance Act, 2009.
(9) Where the acquisition of an asset by a person is the derivation of an
amount exempt from tax, the cost of the asset shall be the exempt amount plus
any amount paid by the person for the asset.
(10) The cost of an asset does not include the amount of any grant,
subsidy, rebate, commission or any other assistance (other than a loan repayable
with or without profit) received or receivable by a person in respect of the
acquisition of the asset, except to the extent to which the amount is chargeable to
tax under this Ordinance.
1[(11) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Board may
prescribe rules for determination of cost for any asset.]
77. Consideration received.—(1) The consideration received by a person on
disposal of an asset shall be the total amount received by the person for the asset
2[or the fair market value thereof, whichever is the higher], including the fair market
value of any consideration received in kind determined at the time of disposal.
(2) Where an asset has been lost or destroyed by a person, the
consideration received for the asset shall include any compensation, indemnity or
damages received by the person under —
(a) an insurance policy, indemnity or other agreement;
(b) a settlement; or
(c) a judicial decision.
(3) The consideration received for an asset treated as disposed of under
sub-section (3) 3[or (3A)] of section 75 shall be the fair market value of the asset
determined at the time it is applied to personal use 4[or discarded or ceased to be
used in business, as the case may be].
(4) The consideration received by a scheduled bank, financial institution,
modaraba, or leasing company approved by the Commissioner (hereinafter
referred to as a “leasing company”) in respect of an asset leased by the company
to another person shall be the residual value received by the leasing company on
maturity of the lease agreement subject to the condition that the residual value
plus the amount realized during the term of the lease towards the cost of the asset
is not less than the original cost of the asset.
(5) Where two or more assets are disposed of by a person in a single
transaction and the consideration received for each asset is not specified, the total
Added by the Finance Act, 2012.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
consideration received by the person shall be apportioned among the assets
disposed of in proportion to their respective fair market values determined at the
time of the transaction.
1[(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Board may
prescribe rules for determination of consideration received for any asset.]
78. Non-arm’s length transactions.— Where an asset is disposed of in a non-
arm’s length transaction —
(a) the person disposing of the asset shall be treated as having received
consideration equal to the fair market value of the asset determined at
the time the asset is disposed; and
(b) the person acquiring the asset shall be treated as having a cost equal
to the amount determined under clause (a).
79. Non-recognition rules.— (1) For the purposes of this Ordinance and
subject to sub-section (2), no gain or loss shall be taken to arise on the disposal of
an asset –
(a) between spouses under an agreement to live apart;
(b) by reason of the transmission of the asset to an executor or beneficiary
on the death of a person;
(c) by reason of a gift of the asset 2[to a relative, as defined in sub-section
(5) of section 85];
(d) by reason of the compulsory acquisition of the asset under any law
where the consideration received for the disposal is reinvested by the
recipient in an asset of a like kind within one year of the disposal;
(e) by a company to its shareholders on liquidation of the company; or
(f) by an association of persons to its members on dissolution of the
association where the assets are distributed to members in accordance
with their interests in the capital of the association.
(2) Sub-section (1) shall not apply where the person acquiring the asset
is a non-resident person at the time of the acquisition 3[in respect of disposal of an
asset as mentioned in clauses (d), (e) and (f) of sub-section (1)].
(3) Where clause (a), (b), (c), (e) or (f) of sub-section (1) applies, the
person acquiring the asset shall be treated as —
(a) acquiring an asset of the same character as the person
disposing of the asset; and
Added by the Finance Act, 2012.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2018.
3 Inserted by the Finance Act, 2021.
(b) acquiring the asset for a cost equal to the cost of the asset for
the person disposing of the asset at the time of the disposal.
(4) The person’s cost of a replacement asset referred to in clause (d) of
sub-section (1) shall be the cost of the asset disposed of plus the amount by which
any consideration given by the person for the replacement asset exceeds the
consideration received by the person for the asset disposed of.
