Division III
Associates
85. Associates. — 3[(1) Subject to sub-section (2), two persons shall be
associates where –
(i) the relationship between the two is such that one may reasonably be
expected to act in accordance with the intentions of the other, or both
persons may reasonably be expected to act in accordance with the
intentions of a third person;
(ii) one person sufficiently influences, either alone or together with an
associate or associates, the other person;
Explanation. – For the purpose of this section, two persons shall be
treated as sufficiently influencing each other, where one or both persons,
directly or indirectly, are economically and financially dependent on each
other and, decisions are made in accordance with the directions,
instructions or wishes of each other for common economic goal; or
(iii) one person enters into a transaction, directly or indirectly, with the other
who is a resident of jurisdiction with zero taxation regime.]
The words “or almost wholly” omitted by the Finance Act, 2003.
The words “local authority” substituted by the Finance Act, 2008.
3 Sub-section (1) substituted by the Finance Act, 2023. The substituted sub-section read as follows:
“(1) Subject to sub-section (2), two persons shall be associates where the relationship between the
two is such that one may reasonably be expected to act in accordance with the intentions of the other,
or both persons may reasonably be expected to act in accordance with the intentions of a third
person.”
(2) Two persons shall not be associates solely by reason of the fact that
one person is an employee of the other or both persons are employees of a third
person.
(3) Without limiting the generality of sub-section (1) and subject to sub-
section (4), the following shall be treated as associates —
(a) an individual and a relative of the individual;
(b) members of an association of persons;
(c) a member of an association of persons and the association,
where the member, either alone or together with an associate
or associates under another application of this section, controls
fifty per cent or more of the rights to income or capital of the
association;
(d) a trust and any person who benefits or may benefit under the
trust;
(e) a shareholder in a company and the company, where the
shareholder, either alone or together with an associate or
associates under another application of this section, controls
either directly or through one or more interposed persons —
(i) fifty per cent or more of the voting power in the company;
(ii) fifty per cent or more of the rights to dividends; or
(iii) fifty per cent or more of the rights to capital; and
(f) two companies, where a person, either alone or together with
an associate or associates under another application of this
section, controls either directly or through one or more
interposed persons —
(i) fifty per cent or more of the voting power in both
companies;
(ii) fifty per cent or more of the rights to dividends in both
companies; or
(iii) fifty per cent or more of the rights to capital in both
companies.
(4) Two persons shall not be associates under clause (a) or (b) of sub-
section (3) where the Commissioner is satisfied that neither person may
reasonably be expected to act in accordance with the intentions of the other.
1[(5) In this section, –
(i) “relative” in relation to an individual, means —
(a) an ancestor, a descendant of any of the grandparents, or
an adopted child, of the individual, or of a spouse of the
individual; or
(b) a spouse of the individual or of any person specified in
clause (a);
(ii) jurisdiction with zero taxation regime means jurisdiction as may
be prescribed.]
1 Sub-section (5) substituted by the Finance Act. 2023. The substituted sub-section (5) read as
follows:
“(5) In this section, “relative” in relation to an individual, means —
(a) an ancestor, a descendant of any of the grandparents, or an adopted child, of the
individual, or of a spouse of the individual; or
(b) a spouse of the individual or of any person specified in clause (a).”
