Division II
Resident and Non-Resident Persons
81. Resident and non-resident persons.— (1) A person shall be a resident
person for a tax year if the person is —
(a) a resident individual, resident company or resident association of
persons for the year; or
(b) the Federal Government.
(2) A person shall be a non-resident person for a tax year if the person is
not a resident person for that year.
82. Resident individual. — An individual shall be a resident individual for a tax
year if the individual —
(a) is present in Pakistan for a period of, or periods amounting in aggregate
to, one hundred and 1[eighty-three] days or more in the tax year; 2[ ] 3[or]
4[ ]
5[ ]
6[ ]
(c) is an employee or official of the Federal Government or a Provincial
Government posted abroad in the tax year 7[;
(d) being a citizen of Pakistan is not present in any other country for more
than one hundred and eighty-two days during the tax year or who is not
a resident taxpayer of any other country.]
The words “eighty-two” substituted by the Finance Act, 2006.
The word “or” omitted by the Finance Act, 2019.
The word “or” added by the Finance Act, 2022.
New clause (ab) inserted by Finance Act, 2019
Clause (ab) omitted by the Finance Act, 2021. The omitted clause read as follows:
“(ab) is present in Pakistan for a period of, or periods amounting in aggregate to, one hundred and
twenty days or more in the tax year and, in the four years preceding the tax year, has been in
Pakistan for a period of, or periods amounting in aggregate to, three hundred and sixty-five
days or more; or”
Clause (b) omitted by the Finance Act, 2003. The omitted clause (b) read as follows:
“(b) is present in Pakistan for a period of, or periods amounting in aggregate to,
ninety days or more in the tax year and who, in the four years preceding the tax
year, has been in Pakistan for a period of, or periods amounting in aggregate
to, three hundred and sixty-five days or more; or”
The full stop substituted with a semicolon and clause (d) inserted by the Finance Act, 2022.
83. Resident company.— A company shall be a resident company for a tax year
if —
(a) it is incorporated or formed by or under any law in force in
Pakistan;
(b) the control and management of the affairs of the company is
situated wholly 1[ ] in Pakistan at any time in the year; or
(c) it is a Provincial Government or 2[Local Government] in Pakistan.
84. Resident association of persons. — An association of persons shall be a
resident association of persons for a tax year if the control and management of the
affairs of the association is situated wholly or partly in Pakistan at any time in the
year.
