Division II
Advance Tax Paid to a Collection Agent
148. Imports.— (1) The Collector of Customs shall collect advance tax from
every importer of goods on the value of the goods at the rate specified in Part II of
the First Schedule 2[in respect of goods classified in Parts I to III of the Twelfth
Schedule] 3[:
Provided that the Board may, by a notification in the official Gazette, add in
the Twelfth Schedule any entry thereto or omit any entry therefrom or amend any
entry therein:
Provided further that in case of goods classified under Part III of the Twelfth
Schedule which are used both as raw material and finished goods, the Board may,
by notification in the official Gazette, specify that goods imported by a person or
class of persons as raw material for its own use shall be treated as classified under
Part II of the Twelfth Schedule, subject to such conditions and procedure as may
be prescribed] 4[:
Provided also that the Collector of Customs, shall not collect tax under this
section, where the recipient of goods is also liable under the Digital Presence
Proceeds tax, Act, 2025 and same has been collected by the payment intermediary
as defined in section 153.]
Words “who was filer” substituted from Finance Act, 2019
2 The expression inserted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
The “full stop” substituted by “colon” and thereafter proviso added through Finance Act, 2020 dated
30th June, 2020
Full stop substituted and a new proviso inserted by the Finance Act, 2025.
1[ 2[ ] ]
3[(2A) Notwithstanding omission of sub-section (2), any notification issued
under the said sub-section and for the time being in force, shall continue to remain
in force, unless 4[amended or] rescinded by the Board through notification in the
official Gazette.”;]
5[ ]
6[ ]
7[ ]
(5) Advance tax shall be collected in the same manner and at the same
time as the customs-duty payable in respect of the import or, if the goods are
exempt from customs-duty, at the time customs-duty would be payable if the goods
were dutiable.
Sub-section (2) substituted by the Finance Act, 2007. The substituted sub-section (2) read as
follows:
“(2) This section shall not apply to –
(a) the re-importation of re-usable containers for re-export qualifying for customs-
duty and sales tax exemption on temporary import under the Customs
Notification No. S.R.O. 344(1)/95, dated the 25th day of April, 1995; or
(b) the importation of the following petroleum products –
“Motor Spirit (MS), Furnace Oil (FO), JP-1 and MTBE”.”
Omitted by Finance act, 2015. The omitted sub-section (2) read as follows:-
“(2)Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to any goods or class of goods or persons or
class of persons importing such goods or class of goods as may be specified by the Board.”
Inserted by Finance Act, 2015.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2018.
Sub-section (3) omitted by the Finance Act, 2007. The omitted sub-section (3) read as follows:
“(3) Where a manufacturer imports raw materials (other than edible oils) exclusively for the
manufacturer’s own use, the Commissioner may certify a reduction (of up to seventy five per cent)
of the rate of advance tax applicable under this section if the aggregate of tax paid or collected in a
tax year equals the amount of tax paid by the manufacturer in the immediately preceding year.”
Sub-section (4) omitted by the Finance Act, 2007. The omitted sub-section (4) read as follows:
“ (4) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section (3), a person being a manufacturer who is liable
to pay advance tax under section 147, imports raw materials (other than edible oils) exclusively for
his, or as the case may be, its own use, the Commissioner shall upon application in writing by such
person, issue an exemption certificate effective from the date on which the certificate is issued to the
30th day of June next falling:
Provided that where the person to whom an exemption certificate has been issued fails to
pay any instalment due, the Commissioner may cancel the certificate.”
Sub-section (4A) omitted by the Finance Act, 2008. The omitted sub-section (4A) read as follows:-
“(4A) Where, in the case of a person whose income is not subject to final taxation, the Commissioner
is satisfied that such person is not likely to pay any tax (other than tax under section 113), the
Commissioner shall, upon application in writing made by such person, issue certificate allowing
payment of tax collectable under this section at a reduced rate of 0.5%”
(6) 1[Subject to sub-section (6A), the] provisions of the Customs Act, 1969
(IV of 1969), in so far as relevant, shall apply to the collection of tax under this
section.
2[(6A) The Board may, by notification in the official Gazette, determine the
minimum value of goods for the purpose of collection of advance tax under this
section.]
3[(7) The tax 4[required to be] collected under this section shall be
5[minimum] tax 6[ ] on the income of the importer arising from the imports subject
to sub-section (1) and this sub-section shall not apply in the case of import of
7[goods on which tax is required to be collected under this section 8[ ] by an
industrial undertaking for its own use.] 9[ ]
The word “The” substituted by the Finance Act, 2024.
Sub-section (6A) inserted by the Finance Act, 2024.
Sub-section (7) substituted by the Finance Act, 2006. The substituted sub-section (7) read as
follows:
“(7) Except in the case of an industrial undertaking importing goods as raw materials, plant,
machinery and equipment for its own use, the tax collected under this section shall be a final tax on
the income of the importer arising from the imports subject to sub-section (1).”
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2012.
Words “a final” substituted through Finance Act, 2019.
Expression “except as provided under sub-section (8)” omitted through Finance Act, 2019.
7 The expression inserted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
Words “at the rate of 1% or 2%” omitted by the Finance Act, 2022.
9 The hyphen and clauses (a),(c),(d)and (e) omitted through Finance Act 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
— (a) raw material, plant, machinery, equipment and parts by an industrial undertaking for its own
use;
[ ]
(c) [motor vehicles] in CBU condition by manufacturer of [motor vehicles] [;]
[(d) large import houses, who,—
(i) have paid-up capital of exceeding Rs. [250] million;
(ii) have imports exceeding Rs.500 million during the tax year;
(iii) own total assets exceeding Rs [350] million at the close of the tax year;
(iv) is single object company;
(v) maintain computerized records of imports and sale of goods;
(vi) maintain a system for issuance of 100% cash receipts on sales;
(vii) present accounts for tax audit every year;
(viii) is registered9[under the Sales Tax Act, 1990] and
(ix) make sales of industrial raw material of manufacturer registered [Under the Sales Tax
Act,1990] [; and] ]
[(e) a foreign produced film imported for the purposes of screening and viewing.]
1[(7A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (7), the tax required
to be collected under this section shall be minimum tax on the income every person
arising from imports of following goods –
(i) edible oil;
(ii) packaging material;
(iii) paper and paper board; or
(iv) plastics:
Provided that the Board with the approval of Minister in-charge may, by a
notification in the official Gazette, add any entry thereto or omit any entry therefrom
or amend any entry therein this sub-section.]
2[ ]
(9) In this section –
“Collector of Customs” means the person appointed as Collector of
Customs under section 3 of the Customs Act, 1969 (IV of 1969), and
includes a Deputy Collector of Customs, an Additional Collector of
Customs, or an officer of customs appointed as such under the
aforesaid section; 3[ ]
4[Value of goods means –
(a) in case of goods chargeable to tax at retail price under the Third
Schedule of the Sales Tax Act, 1990, the retail price of such goods
increased by sales tax payable in respect of the import and
taxable supply of the goods; 5[ ] ]
The sub-section (7A) inserted by the Finance Act, 2022.
2 Sub-section (8) and (8A) omitted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June 2020 the omitted sub-
section read as follows:
[ ] [(8) The tax required to be collected from a person under this section shall be minimum tax
for a tax year on the import of─
[(a)]
(b) edible oil;
(c) packing material; and
(d) plastic raw material imported by an industrial undertaking falling under PCT
headings 39.01 to 39.12.]
[(8A) The tax collected under this section at the time of import of ships by ship-breakers shall
be [minimum] tax.]
The word “and” omitted by the Finance Act, 2004.
4 The expressions substituted by the Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020 the substituted
expressions read as follows:
“value of the goods means the value of the goods as determined under the Customs Act, 1969 (IV of
1969), as if the goods were subject to ad valorem duty increased by the customs-duty, federal excise
duty and sales tax, if any, payable in respect of the import of the goods.”
The word “and” omitted by the Finance Act, 2024.
(b) in case of 1[goods other than those specified in clauses (a) and
(c)]; the value of the goods as determined under the Customs Act,
1969 (IV of 1969), as if the goods were subject to ad valorem duty
increased by the custom-duty, federal excise duty and sales tax,
if any, payable in respect of the import of the goods 2[; and] ; and]]
3[(c) minimum value as notified by the Board under subsection (6A) as
if such goods were subject to ad valorem duty as increased by the
custom-duty, federal excise duty and sales tax, payable in respect
of the import of the goods.]
4[ ]
5[ ]
Divisi on III
Deduction of Tax at Source
149. Salary. — (1) Every 6[person responsible for] paying salary to an employee
shall, at the time of payment, deduct tax from the amount paid at the employee’s
average rate of tax computed at the rates specified in Division I of Part I of the First
Schedule on the estimated income of the employee chargeable under the head
“Salary” for the tax year in which the payment is made 7[including tax under section
4AB] after making 8[adjustment of tax withheld from employee under other heads
and tax credit admissible under section 61 9[and 63] during the tax year after
obtaining documentary evidence], as may be necessary, for 10[:]
The words “all other goods” substituted by the Finance Act, 2024.
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2024.
Clause (c) added by the Finance Act, 2024.
4The Explanation omitted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020 the omitted explanation
read as follows:
“Explanation.- For the purpose of this section the expression “edible oils” includes crude oil,
imported as raw material for manufacture of ghee or cooking oil”
5 Section 148(A) omitted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020 the omitted section read as
follows:
“148A. Tax on local purchase of cooking oil or vegetable ghee by certain persons.— (1)The
manufacturers of cooking oil or vegetable ghee, or both, shall be chargeable to tax at the rate of two
percent on purchase of locally produced edible oil.
(2) The tax payable under sub-section (1) shall be final tax in respect of income accruing from
locally produced edible oil.”
The word “employer” substituted by the Finance Act, 2013.
Expression inserted by the Finance Act, 2024.
The words “such adjustment” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
The expression “62, 63 and 64” substituted by the Finance Act, 2022.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2007.
1[(i) tax withheld from the employee under this Ordinance during the tax
year;
(ii) any excess deduction or deficiency arising out of any previous
deduction; or
(iii) failure to make deduction during the year;]
2[(1A) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section (1), any person
responsible for paying pension to a former employee who is below the age of
seventy years and deriving pension income during a tax year in which the payment
exceeds rupees ten million, shall at the time of payment, deduct tax from the
amount which is over and above rupees ten million at the rate provided in Division
I of Part I of the First Schedule of the Ordinance, along with tax deducted under
section 4AB after making adjustment of tax withheld from former employee under
other heads and tax credit admissible under sections 61 and 63 of the Ordinance
during the tax year after obtaining documentary evidence, as may be necessary,
for –
(i) tax withheld from the former employee under this Ordinance during the tax
year; or
(ii) any excess deduction or deficiency arising out of any previous deduction; or
(iii) failure to make deduction during the year.]
(2) The average rate of tax of an employee for a tax year for the purposes
of sub-section (1) shall be computed in accordance with the following formula,
namely:–
A/B
where –
A is the tax that would be payable if the amount referred to in component B of
the formula were the employee’s taxable income for that year 3[plus tax
chargeable under section 4AB]; and
B is the employee’s estimated income under the head “Salary” for that year.
4[(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), every
person responsible for making payment for directorship fee or fee for attending
board meeting or such fee by whatever name called, shall at the time of payment,
deduct tax at the rate of twenty percent of the gross amount payable.
(4) Tax deductible under sub-section (3) shall be adjustable.]
The words “any excess deduction or deficiency arising out of any previous deduction or failure to make
a deduction during the year.” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
Sub-section (1A) inserted by the Finance Act, 2025.
Expression inserted by the Finance Act, 2024.
Sub-section (3) and (4) added by the Finance Act, 2014.
150. Dividends. — Every 1[person] paying a dividend shall deduct tax from the
gross amount of the dividend paid 2[or collect tax from the amount of dividend in
specie] 3[ ] at the rate specified in 4[Division I of Part III] of the First Schedule.
5[ ]
6[ ]
151. Profit on debt. — (1) Where –
7[(a) a person pays yield on an account, deposit or a certificate under the
National Savings Scheme or Post Office Savings Account;]
(b) a banking company 8[or] financial institution pays any profit on a debt,
being an account or deposit maintained with the company or institution;
9[ ]
10[(c) the Federal Government, a Provincial Government or a 11[Local
Government] pays to any person 12[ ] profit on any security 13[other than
that referred to in clause (a)] issued by such Government or authority;
or]
14[(d) a banking company, a financial institution, a company referred
The words “resident company” substituted by the Finance Act, 2009.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2021.
The words “or collect tax from the shareholder in the case of bonus shares,” omitted by the Finance
Act, 2002.
The expression “Division III of Part I” substituted by the expression “Division I of Part III” by the Finance
Act, 2014.
Inserted by the Presidential Order No.F.2(1)/2016-Pub dated 31.08.2016.
Section 150A omitted by the Finance Act, 2021. The omitted section read as follows:
“150A. Return on investment in Sukuks— Every special purpose vehicle, or a company, at the time
of]making payment of a return on investment in sukuks to a sukuk holder shall deduct tax from the
gross amount of return on investment at the rate specified in Division IB of Part III of the First
Schedule.”]
Clause (a) substituted by the Finance Act, 2003. The substituted clause (a) read as follows:
“(a) a person pays yield on a National Savings Deposit Certificate, including a Defence Savings
Certificate, under the National Savings Scheme;”
The word “and” substituted by the Finance Act, 2003.
The word “or” omitted by the Finance Act, 2002.
Clause (c) substituted by the Finance Act, 2002. The substituted clause (c) read as follows:
“(c) the Federal Government, a Provincial Government, a local authority, banking company,
financial institution, company referred to in clauses (a) and (b) of the definition of “company” in sub-
section (2) of section 80, or finance society pays any profit on any bond, certificate, debenture, security
or instrument of any kind (other than a loan agreement between a borrower and a banking company
or a development finance institution) to any person other than a financial institution, “
The words “local authority” substituted by the Finance Act, 2008.
The commas and words “, other than a financial institution,” omitted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Added by the Finance Act, 2002.
to in 1[sub-clauses (i) and (ii) of clause (b)] of sub-section (2) of section
80, or a finance society pays any profit on any bond, certificate,
debenture, security or instrument of any kind (other than a loan
agreement between a borrower and a banking company or a
development finance institution) to any person other than financial
institution.]
the payer of the profit shall deduct tax at the rate specified in Division IA of Part III
of the First Schedule from the gross amount of the yield or profit paid as reduced
by the amount of Zakat, if any, paid by the recipient under the Zakat and Ushr
Ordinance, 1980 (XVII of 1980), at the time the profit is paid to the recipient.
2[(1A) Every special purpose vehicle or a company, at the time of making
payment of a return on investment in sukuks to a sukuk holder shall deduct tax
from the gross amount of return on investment at the rate specified in Division IB
of Part III of the First Schedule.]
(2) This section shall not apply to any profit on debt that is subject to sub-
section (2) of section 152.
3[(3) Tax deductible under this section shall be a 4[minimum] tax on the profit
on debt arising to a taxpayer, except where —
(a) taxpayer is a company; or
(b) profit on debt is taxable under section 7B.]
5[151A. Gain arising on disposal of certain debt securities. — (1) Every
custodian of debt securities including a banking company responsible to maintain
Investor Portfolio Securities (IPS) Account on behalf of holder of a debt security
shall at the time of disposal of debt securities including government securities
deduct tax at the rate specified in Division IIIAA of Part III of the First Schedule on
the gross amount of capital gain arising to such holder and deposit the same in
government treasury:
Provided that this section shall not apply on disposal of debt securities made
through registered stock exchange and which are settled through NCCPL.
The words, letters and brackets “clauses (a) and (b)” substituted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Sub-section (1A) inserted by the Finance Act, 2021.
Substituted by the Finance Act, 2015. The substituted sub-section (3) read as follows:-
“(3) Tax deductible under this section shall be a final tax on the profit on debt arising to a
taxpayer other than a company:
Provided that in the case of a non-filer other than a company the final tax shall be equal
to the tax deductible in the case of filer and the tax deducted in excess of that shall be advance
income tax adjustable against tax liability.”
The word “final” substituted through Finance Act, 2019.
Section 151A inserted by the Finance Act, 2025.
(2) The capital gain arising to the holder on disposal of debt security
mentioned in sub-section (1) shall be computed in accordance with the formula
provided in sub-section (1A) of section 37A of the Ordinance.]
152. Payments to non-residents.— (1) Every person paying an amount of
1[royalty] or fees for technical services to a non-resident person that is chargeable
to tax under section 6 shall deduct tax from the gross amount paid at the rate
specified in Division IV of Part I of the First Schedule.
2[(1A) Every person making a payment in full or part (including a payment
by way of advance) to a non-resident person on the execution of –
(a) a contract or sub-contract under a construction, assembly or
installation project in Pakistan, including a contract for the supply of
supervisory activities in relation to such project; or
(b) any other contract for construction or services rendered relating
thereto; or
(c) a contract for advertisement services rendered by T.V. Satellite
Channels,
shall deduct tax from the gross amount payable under the contract at the rate
specified in Division II of Part III of the First Schedule.]
3[(1AA) Every person making a payment of insurance premium or re-
insurance premium to a non-resident person shall deduct tax from the gross
amount paid at the rate specified in Division II of Part III of the First Schedule.]
4[(1AAA)Every person making a payment for advertisement services to a
non-resident media person relaying from outside Pakistan shall deduct tax from
the gross amount paid at the rate specified in 5[Division II] of Part III of the First
Schedule.]
6[ ]
Substituted for the word “royalties” by the Finance Act, 2002.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2006.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2008.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2012.
The expression “Division IIIA” substituted by the Finance Act, 2017.
Sub-section (1B) inserted by the Finance Act, 2006.
1[(1B) The tax deductible under sub-sections (1A), (1AA) and (1AAA) shall
be a minimum tax on the income of the non-resident persons in respect of
payments mentioned therein.
(1BA) Every person responsible for making payment directly or through an
agent or intermediary to a non-resident person for foreign produced commercial
for advertisement on any television channel or any other media, shall deduct tax
at the rate of twenty percent from the gross amount paid. The tax deductible under
this sub-section shall be final tax on the income of non-resident person arising out
of such payment.]
2[ ]
3[ ]
4[ ]
5[(1C) Every banking company or a financial institution remitting outside
Pakistan an amount of fee for offshore digital services, chargeable to tax under
section 6, to a non-resident person on behalf of any resident or a permanent
establishment of a non-resident in Pakistan shall deduct tax from the gross amount
paid at the rate specified in Division IV of Part I of the First Schedule] 6[:
Provided that the banking company and financial institution shall not deduct
the tax under this sub-section where the recipient is also liable to Digital Presence
Proceeds tax and same has been collected.]
7[(1D) Every banking company or a financial institution maintaining 8[, for a
period not less than six months,] special convertible rupee account (SCRA) of a
Sub-sections (1B), (1BB) and (1BBB) substituted by the Finance Act, 2021. The substituted sub-
sections read as follows:
“(1B) The tax 1[deductible] under sub-section (1A) shall be a 1[minimum] tax on the income of a non-
resident person arising from a contract 1[.]
(1BB) The tax 1[deductible] under sub-section (1AA) shall be a 1[minimum] tax on the income of the
non-resident person arising out of such payment.]
(1BBB) The tax deductible under sub-section (1AAA) shall be minimum tax on the income of non-
resident person arising out of such payment.”
Proviso omitted by the Finance Act, 2019 omitted proviso read as follow:
Provided that the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply in respect of a non-resident person
unless he opts for the final tax regime.
Sub-section (1BB) inserted by the Finance Act, 2008.
4 The new Sub-section (1BBB) inserted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2018.
Full stop substituted with a colon and thereafter a new proviso added by the Finance Act, 2025.
7 New sub-sections (1D) and (1E) inserted through Tax Laws (Second Amendment), 2019 dated 26th
December, 2019.
Words inserted by the Finance Act, 2025.
non-resident company having no permanent establishment in Pakistan shall
deduct tax from capital gain arising on the disposal of debt instruments and
Government securities including treasury bills and Pakistan investment bonds
invested through SCRA at the rate specified in Division II of Part III of the First
Schedule] 1[:
Provided that in case of holding period of debt instruments and Government
securities including treasury bills and Pakistan investment bonds is less than six
months, the capital gain arising on the disposal of such securities to the non-
resident person shall be taxed at the rates provided in paragraph (2) of Division II
of Part III of the First Schedule of the Ordinance.]
2[(1DA) Every banking company maintaining a Foreign Currency Value
Account (FCVA) or a non-resident Pakistani Rupee Value Account (NRVA) of a
non-resident individual holding Pakistan Origin Card (POC) or National ID Card for
Overseas Pakistanis (NICOP) or Computerized National ID Card (CNIC) shall
deduct tax from capital gain arising on the disposal of debt instruments and
government securities and certificates (including Shariah compliant variant)
invested through aforesaid accounts at the rate specified in Division II of Part III of
the First Schedule.]
3[(1DB) Every special purpose vehicle or a company, at the time of making
payment of a return on investment in sukuks to a non-resident sukuk holder shall
deduct tax from the gross amount of return on investment at the rate specified in
Division IB of Part III of the First Schedule.] ]
4[(1DC) Every exchange company licensed by the State Bank of Pakistan
shall deduct tax at the time of making payment of service charges or commission
or fee, by whatever name called, to the global money transfer operators,
international money transfer operators or such other persons engaged in
international money transfers or cross-border remittances for facilitating outward
remittances, at the rates given in Division IV, Part I of the First Schedule:
Provided that where such person retains service charges or
commission or fee, by whatever name called from the amount payable to the
exchange company on any account, the exchange company shall be
deemed to have paid the service charges or commission or fee, by whatever
name called and the exchange company shall collect the tax accordingly.
Full stop substituted with a colon and thereafter a new proviso added by the Finance Act, 2025.
Sub-section (1DA) inserted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier this insertion was made through Tax
Laws (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
Sub-section (1DB) inserted by the Finance Act, 2021.
Sub-sections (1DC) and (1DD) inserted by the Finance Act, 2022.
(1DD) Every banking company while making payment to card network
company or payment gateway or any other person, of any transaction fee or
licensing fee or service charges or commission or fee by whatever name called
or interbank financial telecommunication services, shall deduct tax at the rates
given in Division IV, Part I of the First Schedule:
Provided that where card network company or payment gateway or
any other person retains money in relation to aforementioned services from
the amount payable to the banking company on any account, the banking
company shall be deemed to have paid the amount and the banking
company shall collect the tax accordingly]
1[(1E) The tax deductible under sub-sections (1D), (1DA) 2[(IDB), (1DC) and
(IDD)] shall be a final tax in respect of persons and income mentioned therein.]
(2) Subject to sub-section (3), every person paying an amount to a
non-resident person (other than an amount to which sub-section (1) 3[or sub-
section (1A) 4[, (1AA)] 5[, (1AAA), 6[(1C)] or (2A)] applies)] shall deduct tax from
the gross amount paid at the rate specified in Division II of Part III of the First
Schedule.
7[(2A) Every prescribed person making a payment in full or part including a
payment by way of advance to a permanent establishment in Pakistan of a non-
resident person—
8[(a)] for the sale of goods 9[except where the sale is made by the
importer of the goods and tax under section 148 in respect of
such goods has been paid and the goods are sold in the same
condition as they were when imported];
10[(b)] for the rendering of or providing services; and
Sub-section (1E) substituted by the Finance Act, 2021. Earlier an amendment was made through
Tax Laws (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021. The substituted sub-section read as follows:
“(1E) The tax deductible under sub-section (1D) shall be a final tax on the income of the non-
resident company arising out of such capital gain.”
The expression “and (1DB)” substituted by the Finance Act, 2022.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2007.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2010.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2012.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2019
7 Added by the Finance Act, 2012.
Clause (i) re-numbered by Finance Act 2017.
9Added by the Finance Act, 2016.
Clause (ii) re-numbered by Finance Act 2017.
1[(c)] on the execution of a contract, other than a contract for the sale
of goods or the rendering of or providing services, shall, at the
time of making the payment, deduct tax from the gross amount
payable (including sales tax, if any) at the rate specified in
Division II of Part III of the First Schedule.]
2[(2AA) sub-section (1AA) shall not apply to an amount, with the written
approval of the Commissioner, hat is taxable to a permanent establishment in
Pakistan of the non-resident person.]
3[(2B) the tax deductible under sub-section (2A) shall be minimum tax:
Provided that tax deductible under clause (a) of sub-section (2A)
shall not be minimum tax where payments are received for sale of goods by a
company being a manufacturer of such goods.]
(3) Sub-section (2) does not apply to an amount —
(a) that is subject to deduction of tax under section 149, 150, 4[ ] 5[
] 156 6[or 233];
(b) with the written approval of the Commissioner, that is taxable to
a permanent establishment in Pakistan of the non-resident
person;
(c) that is payable by a person who is liable to pay tax on the
amount as representative of the non-resident person under sub-
section (3) of section 172; or
(d) where the non-resident person is not chargeable to tax in
respect of the amount.
(4) Where a person claims to be a representative of a non-resident
person for the purposes of clause (c) of sub-section (3), the person shall file a
declaration to that effect with the Commissioner prior to making any payment to
the non-resident person.
Clause (iii) re-numbered by Finance Act 2017.
2 Added by the Finance Act, 2012.
3 Sub-section (2B) substituted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020 the substituted sub-
section read as follows:
“(2B) The tax deductible under clause (b) of sub-section (2A) shall be a minimum tax and the provisions of
sub-clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of clause (b) of
sub-section (3) 3[ ] of section 153 shall mutatis mutandis apply.”
4 The figure and comma “153,” omitted by the Finance Act, 2012.
5The figure and comma “155,” omitted by the Finance Act, 2013.
6Inserted by the Finance Act, 2006.
1[2[(4A) The Commissioner may, on application made 3[in the prescribed
form] by the recipient of payment referred to in sub-section (1A) having permanent
establishment in Pakistan, or by a recipient of payment referred to in sub-section
(2A), as the case may be, and after making such inquiry as the Commissioner
thinks fit, allow by order in writing, in cases where the tax deductable under sub-
section (1) or sub-section (2A) is 4[not minimum tax], any person to make the
payment 5[after deduction of tax at a reduced rate but such reduction shall not
exceed eighty percent of the rate specified in the said Division].] ]
6[(4B) The Commissioner may, in case of payment that constitutes part of
an overall arrangement of a cohesive business operation as referred to in
paragraph (ii) of sub-clause (g) of clause (41) of section 2, on application made by
the person making payment and after making such inquiry, as the Commissioner
thinks fit, allow by order in writing, the person to make payment after deduction of
tax equal to 7[twenty] percent of the tax chargeable on such payment under sub-
section (1A):
Provided that the credit of the tax so deducted shall be available to
the permanent establishment of the non-resident accounting for overall
profits arising on the overall cohesive business operation.]
(5) Where a person intends to make a payment to a non-resident person
without deduction of tax under this section,8[other than payments liable to reduced
rate under relevant agreement for avoidance of double taxation,] the person shall,
before making the payment, furnish to the Commissioner a notice in writing setting
out —
(a) the name and address of the non-resident person; 9[ ]
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2015.
Sub-section (4A) substituted by the Finance Act, 2017. The substituted sub-section (4A) reads as
follows:
“(4A) The Commissioner may, on application made by the recipient of a payment referred to in sub-section (2A)
and after making such inquiry as the Commissioner thinks fit, may allow in cases where the tax deductable under
sub-section (2A) is adjustable, by order in writing, any person to make the payment, without deduction of tax or
deduction of tax at a reduced rate.”;]
3 The words inserted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
The word “adjustable” substituted through Finance Act, 2019.
The expression “without deduction of tax or deduction of tax at a reduced rate” substituted by the
Finance Act, 2024.
New sub-section (4B) inserted through Finance Act, 2019.
7 The word “thirty” substituted by “twenty” through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2008.
9 The word “and” omitted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
(b) the nature and amount of the payment 1[;and
(c) such other particulars as may be prescribed.]
2[(5A) The Commissioner on receipt of notice shall 3[, within thirty days,] pass
an order accepting the contention or making the order under sub-section (6)] 4[:
Provided that the Commissioner shall be deemed to have issued the
exemption certificate upon the expiry of thirty days and the certificate shall be
automatically processed and issued by Iris subject to the condition that in
computing the said period of thirty days, there shall be excluded days taken for
adjournment by the applicant:
Provided further that the Commissioner may modify or cancel the certificate
issued automatically by Iris on the basis of reasons to be recorded in writing after
providing an opportunity of being heard.]
(6) Where a person has notified the Commissioner of a payment under
sub-section (5) and the Commissioner has reasonable grounds to believe that the
non-resident person is chargeable to tax under this Ordinance in respect of the
payment, the Commissioner may, by 5[order] in writing, direct the person making
the payment to deduct tax from the payment in accordance with sub-section (2).
(7) Sub-section (5) shall not apply to a payment on account of –
6[(a) an import of goods where title to the goods passes outside
Pakistan and is supported by import documents, except where —
The “full stop” substituted by “semi colon” and the word “and” thereafter new clause (c) added
through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2004.
Full stop substituted with a colon and new provisos added by the Finance Act, 2023.
The word “notice” substituted by the Finance Act, 2004.
6Clause (a) substituted by the finance Act 2018, the substituted clause (a) is read as follows
“(a) an import of goods where title to the goods passes outside Pakistan6[and is supported by
import documents], except an 6[ ] import that is part of an overall arrangement for the
supply of goods, their installation, and any commission and guarantees in respect of the
supply where –
(i) the supply is made by the head office outside Pakistan of a person to a permanent
establishment of the person in Pakistan;
(ii) the supply is made by a permanent establishment of the person outside Pakistan to a
permanent establishment of the person in Pakistan;
(iii) the supply is made between associates; or
(iv) the supply is made by a resident person or a Pakistan permanent establishment of a non-
resident person; or”
(i) the supply is made in connection with the overall arrangement
for the supply of goods, installation, construction, assembly,
commission, guarantees or supervisory activities and all or
principal activities are undertaken or performed either by the
associates of the person supplying the goods or its
permanent establishment, whether or not the title passes
outside Pakistan and whether or not the goods are imported
in the name of the associate or any other person; or
(ii) the supply is made by a resident person or a Pakistan
permanent establishment of a non-resident person in
connection with the overall arrangement as referred to in
sub-clause (i); or” ]
(b) educational and medical expenses remitted in accordance with
the regulations of the State Bank of Pakistan.
1[(8) In this section “prescribed person” means a prescribed person as
defined in sub-section (7) of section 153.]
2[ ]
3[ ]
Added by the Finance Act, 2012.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2016.
Section 152A omitted by the Finance Act, 2021. The omitted section read as follows:
“152A. Payment for foreign produced commercials.─ (1) Every person responsible for making
payment directly or through an agent or intermediary to a non-resident person for foreign produced
commercial for advertisement on any television channel or any other media shall deduct tax at the
rate of twenty percent from the gross amount paid.
(2) The tax deductable under sub-section (1), shall be final tax on the income of non-
resident person arising out of such payment.”
1[153. Payments for goods, services and contracts.— (1) Every prescribed
person making a payment in full or part including a payment by way of advance to
a resident person 2[ ] 3[ ] —
Section 153 substituted by the Finance Act, 2011. The substituted section 153 read as follows:
“153. Payments for goods and services. — (1) Every prescribed person making a payment in full
or part including a payment by way of advance to a resident person or permanent establishment in
Pakistan of a non-resident person—
(a) for the sale of goods;
(b) for the rendering of or providing of services;
(c) on the execution of a contract, other than a contract for the sale of goods or the
rendering of or providing of services,
shall, at the time of making the payment, deduct tax from the gross amount payable at the rate specified
in Division III of Part III of the First Schedule.
(1A) Every exporter or an export house making a payment in full or part including a payment by
way of advance to a resident person or permanent establishment in Pakistan of a non-resident person
for the rendering of or providing of services of stitching, dying, printing, embroidery, washing, sizing
and weaving, shall at the time of making the payment, deduct tax from the gross amount payable at
the rate specified in Division IV of Part III of the First Schedule.
(2) The gross amount payable for a sale of goods shall include the sales tax, if any, payable
in respect of the sale.
(3) Omitted.
(4) The Commissioner may, on application made by the recipient of a payment referred to
in sub-section (1) and after making such enquiry as the Commissioner thinks fit, allow, by order in
writing, any person to make the payment without deduction of tax.
(5) Sub-section (1) shall not apply to –
(a) a sale of goods where –
(i) the sale is made by the importer of the goods;
(ii) the importer has paid tax under section 148 in respect of the goods; and
(iii) the goods are sold in the same condition they were in when imported;
(b) a refund of any security deposit;
(ba) a payment made by the Federal Government, a Provincial Government or a
Local Government] to a contractor for construction materials supplied to the
contractor by the said Government or the authority;
(bb) a cotton ginner who deposits in the Government Treasury, an amount equal to
the amount of tax deductible on the payment being made to him, and evidence
to this effect is provided to the “prescribed person”;
(c) the purchase of an asset under a lease and buy back agreement by a modaraba,
leasing company, banking company or financial institution; or
(d) any payment for securitization of receivables by a Special Purpose Vehicle to
the Originator.
(e) Omitted.
(6) The tax deducted under this section shall be a final tax on the income of a resident
person arising from transactions referred to in sub-section (1) or (1A):
Provided that sub-section (6) shall not apply to companies in respect of
transactions referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1):
Provided further that this sub-section shall not apply to payments received on
account of—
(i) advertisement services, by owners of newspapers and magazines;
(ii) sale of goods and execution of contracts by a public company listed on
a registered stock exchange in Pakistan; and
(iii) the rendering of or providing of services referred to in sub-clause (b) of
sub-section (1):
Provided that tax deducted under sub-clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section
153 shall be minimum tax.
(a) for the sale of goods 1[including toll manufacturing] 2[, except
where payment is less than seventy-five thousand Rupees in
aggregate, during a financial year];
(b) for the rendering of or providing of services 3[except where
payment is less than thirty thousand Rupees in aggregate, during
a financial year];
(c) on the execution of a contract, 4[including contract signed by a
sportsperson] 5[but not including] a contract for the sale of goods
or the rendering of or providing services, shall, at the time of
(6A) The provisions of sub-section (6) in so far as they relate to payments on account of
supply of goods from which tax is deductible under this section shall not apply in respect of a company
being a manufacturer of such goods.
(6B) Omitted previously.
(7) Omitted previously.
(8) Where any tax is deducted by a person making a payment to a Special Purpose Vehicle,
on behalf of the Originator, the tax is credited to the Originator.
(8A) Omitted previously.
(9) In this section, –
“prescribed person” means –
(a) the Federal Government;
(b) a company;
(c) an association of persons constituted by, or under law;
(cc) a non-profit organization;
(d) a foreign contractor or consultant;
(e) a consortium or joint venture;
(f) an exporter or an export house for the purpose of sub-section (1A);
(g) an association of persons, having turnover of fifty million rupees or above in tax
year 2007 1[or in any subsequent tax year .
(h) an individual, having turnover of fifty million rupees or above in the tax year 2009
or in any subsequent year.
“services” includes the services of accountants, architects, dentists, doctors, engineers,
interior decorators and lawyers, otherwise than as an employee.
“sale of goods” includes a sale of goods for cash or on credit, whether under written
contract or not “manufacturer” for the purpose of this section means, a person who is
engaged in production or manufacturing of goods, which includes-
(a) any process in which an article singly or in combination with other articles,
material, components, is either converted into another distinct article or produce
is so changed, transferred, or reshaped that it becomes capable of being put to
use differently or distinctly; or
(b) a process of assembling, mixing, cutting or preparation of goods in any other manner.”
2 The word “or” omitted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
The words “permanent establishment in Pakistan of a non-resident person” omitted by the Finance
Act, 2012.
1 The words inserted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
2 Inserted by the Finance Act, 2018.
3 Inserted by the Finance Act, 2018.
4 Inserted by the Finance Act, 2014.
The words “other than” substituted by the words “but not including” by the Finance Act, 2014.
making the payment, deduct tax from the gross amount payable
(including sales tax, if any) at the rate specified in Division III of
Part III of the First Schedule 1[;]
2[Provided that where the recipient of the payment under
clause (b) receives the payment through an agent or any other
third person and the agent or, as the case may be, the third person
retains service charges or fee, by whatever name called, from the
payment remitted to the recipient, the agent or the third person
shall be treated to have been paid the service charges or fee by
the recipient and the recipient shall collect tax along with the
payment received.]
(2) Every exporter or an export house making a payment in full or part
including a payment by way of advance to a resident person or permanent
establishment in Pakistan of a non-resident person for rendering of or providing
services of stitching, dying, printing, embroidery, washing, sizing and weaving,
shall at the time of making the payment, deduct tax from the gross amount payable
at the rate specified in Division IV of Part III of the First Schedule.
3[(2A) Notwithstanding the provision of sub-section (1), –
(i) every payment intermediary at the time of processing payment
through digital means, on behalf of a seller of digitally ordered
goods or services through locally operated e-commerce
platforms (including websites); and
(ii) every courier business providing courier services collecting
cash from a buyer under Cash on Delivery (CoD) payment
terms on behalf of a seller for the supply of digitally ordered
goods and services through e-commerce platforms (including
websites);
shall collect tax from the gross amount payable (including sales tax, if any) to the
seller at the rate specified in Division IVA of Part I of the First Schedule to the
Ordinance and deposit to government treasury.]
1 Full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2017.
2 Added by the Finance Act, 2017.
3 Sub-section (2A) inserted by the Finance Act, 2025.
(3) The tax 1[deductible] under 2[ ] sub-section (1) and under sub-section
(2) of this section, on the income of a resident person or 3[ ], shall be 4[minimum]
tax.
Provided that,—
(a) tax deducted under clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall 5[not be
minimum tax] where payments are received on sale or supply
of goods, by a, —
(i) company being a manufacturer of such goods; or
(ii) public company listed on a registered stock exchange in
Pakistan;
6[ ]
(c) tax deducted under clause (c) of sub-section (1) shall be
adjustable if payments are received by a public company listed
on a registered stock exchange in Pakistan, on account of
execution of contracts7[ ] 8[ ] 9[.
The words “deducted” substituted by the Finance Act, 2012.
2 The words “clauses (a) and (c) of” omitted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
The words “ permanent establishment in Pakistan of a non-resident person” omitted by the Finance
Act, 2012.
The word “final” substituted by the Finance Act, 2019
The words “be adjustable” substituted through Finance Act, 2019.
6 Clause (b) omitted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020 the omitted clause reads as
follow:-
“(b) tax deductible shall be a minimum tax on transactions referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1)."
6[“(i) where the aforesaid minimum tax for providing or rendering services, in respect of
sectors as specified in clause (94) of Part IV of the Second Schedule is in excess of tax payable
under Division II of Part. I of the First Schedule, the excess amount of tax paid shall be carried
forward for adjustment against tax liability under the aforesaid Part of the subsequent tax year;”]
6[“(ii) where the excess tax is not wholly adjusted, the amount not adjusted shall be carried forward
to the following tax year and adjusted against tax liability under the aforesaid Part for that
year, and so on, but the said excess shall not be carried forward to more than five tax years
immediately succeeding the tax year for which the excess was first paid; and”]
6[“(iii) the said excess amount shall not be carried forward in case of a company for which
provisions of this clause are not applicable under clause (94) of Part IV of the Second
Schedule; 6[ ] ";]
substituted “.” by the Finance Act, 2015
The word “and” omitted by the Finance Act, 2016.
Semi colon substituted with a full stop and new explanation added by the by the Finance
(Supplementary) Act, 2022.
"Explanation.— For the removal of doubt, it is explained that the
income of resident person referred to in sub-section (3) means
the amount on which tax is deductible under sub-section (1) or
(2) of this section.]
1[ ]
2[ ]
3[(4) The Commissioner may, on application made by the recipient of a
payment referred to in sub-section (1) and after making such inquiry as the
Commissioner thinks fit, may allow in cases where tax deductible under sub-
section (1) is not minimum, by an order in writing, any person to make the payment
after deduction of tax at reduced rate but such reduction shall not exceed eighty
percent of the rate specified in the said Division 4[except in cases of public limited
companies where the Commissioner may allow payment without deduction of any
tax]:
Provided that the Commissioner shall issue reduced rate certificate within
fifteen days of filing of application to a company if advance tax liability has been
discharged:
Provided further that the Commissioner shall be deemed to have issued the
reduced rate certificate upon the expiry of fifteen days to the aforesaid company
and the certificate shall be automatically processed and issued by Iris:
1 Claude (d) omitted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020 the omitted clause read as
follows: “(d)tax deducted under clause (c) of sub-section (1) in respect of a sportsperson shall be
1[minimum] tax 1[ ] 1[; and] “
2 Claude (e) omitted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020 the omitted clause read as
follows: “(e) tax deducted under clause (b) of sub-section (1) by person making payments to
electronic and print media for advertising services shall be 2[minimum] tax 2[ ].”
Sub-section (4) substituted by the Finance Act, 2024. The substituted sub-section read as follows:
“(4) The Commissioner may, on application made by the recipient of a payment referred to in sub-
section (1) and after making such inquiry as the Commissioner thinks fit, may allow in cases where
tax deductible under sub-section (1) is 3[not minimum], by an order in writing, any person to make
the payment,—
(a) without deduction of tax; or
(b) deduction of tax at a reduced rate 3[;
Provided that the Commissioner shall issue certificate for payment under clause (a) of sub-section
(1) without deduction of tax within fifteen days of filing of application to a 3[company] if advance tax
liability has been discharged:
Provided further that the Commissioner shall be deemed to have issued the exemption certificate
upon the expiry of fifteen days to the aforesaid 3[ ] company and the certificate shall be automatically
processed and issued by Iris:
Provided also that the Commissioner may modify or cancel the certificate issued automatically by
Iris on the basis of reasons to be recorded in writing after providing an opportunity of being heard.]”
Words inserted by the Finance Act, 2025.
Provided also that the Commissioner may modify or cancel the certificate
issued automatically by Iris on the basis of reasons to be recorded in writing after
providing an opportunity of being heard.]
1[ ]
(5) Sub-section (1) shall not apply to —
(a) a sale of goods where the sale is made by the importer of the
goods and tax under section 148 in respect of such goods has
been paid and the goods are sold in the same condition as they
were when imported;
2[ ]
(c) a refund of any security deposit;
(d) a payment made by the Federal Government, a Provincial
Government or a Local Government to a contractor for
construction materials supplied to the contractor by the said
Government or the authority;
3[ ]
(f) the purchase of an asset under a lease and buy back
agreement by a modaraba, leasing company, banking company
or financial institution; or
(g) any payment for securitization of receivables 4[or issuance of
sukuks] by a Special Purpose Vehicle to the Originator.
(6) Where any tax is deducted by a person making a payment for a
Special Purpose Vehicle, on behalf of the Originator, the tax is credited to the
Originator.
1Sub-section (4A) omitted through Finance Act, 2019, omitted sub-section read as follows:
(4A) The Commissioner, on an application made by the recipient of a payment referred to in
clause (94) of Part IV of the Second Schedule, in cases where the said recipient has fulfilled the
conditions as specified in the said clause, by an order in writing for a period of at least three months,
may allow any person to make the payment without deduction of tax in respect of payments as referred
to in clauses (b) of sub-section (1) of section 153:
Provided that the recipient of the payment has made advance payment of tax equal to two
percent of the total turnover of the corresponding period of the immediately preceding tax year.
Clause (b) omitted by the Finance Act, 2021. The omitted clause read as follows:
“(b) payments made to traders of yarn by the taxpayers specified in the zero- rated regime of sales
tax (as provided under clause (45A) of Part-IV of the Second Schedule);”
Clause (e) omitted by the Finance Act, 2016. The omitted clause (e) read as follows:-
“(e) a cotton ginner who deposits in the Government Treasury, an amount equal to the amount of
tax deductible on the payment being made to him, and evidence to this effect is provided to the
“prescribed person”.
Inserted by the Presidential Order No.F.2(1)/2016-Pub dated 31.08.2016.
(7) In this section, —
(i) “prescribed person” means—
(a) the Federal Government;
(b) a company;
(c) an association of persons constituted by, or under law;
(d) a non-profit organization;
(e) a foreign contractor or consultant;
(f) a consortium or joint venture;
(g) an exporter or an export house for the purpose of sub-
section (2);
(h) an association of persons, having turnover of 1[one
hundred] million rupees or above in 2[any of the preceding
tax years]; 3[ ]
(i) an individual, having turnover of 4[one hundred] million
rupees or above in 5[any of the preceding tax years]; 6[ ]
[(j) a person registered under the Sales Tax Act, 1990
7[having turnover of one hundred million rupees or more
in any of the preceding tax years]; 8[ ] 9[ ] ]
10[(k) a person deriving income from the business of
construction and sale of residential, commercial or other
buildings (builder); 11[ ]
1 The word “fifty” substituted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
2 The expression “tax year 2007 or in any subsequent tax year” substituted by the finance Act 2018.
The word “or” omitted by the Finance Act, 2013.
4 The word “fifty” substituted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
The expression “the tax year 2009 or in any subsequent tax year” substituted by the finance Act 2018.
6 The word “or” omitted by the finance Act 2018.
7 The expression inserted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
8 Inserted by the finance Act 2018.
The word “or” omitted by the Finance Act, 2025.
Added by the Finance Act, 2018.
The word “or” omitted by the Finance Act, 2025.
(l) a person deriving income from the business of
development and sale of residential, commercial or other
plots (developer)] 1[;]
2[(m) for the purpose of sub-section (2A), a payment
intermediary; or
(n) for the purpose of sub-section (2A), a courier service.]
(ii) “services” includes the services of accountants, architects,
dentists, doctors, engineers, interior decorators and lawyers,
otherwise than as an employee;
3[(iia) “courier service” means any specialized entity that provides
fast, secure and often tracked transportation of documents,
packages and small freight, typically offering door-to-door
delivery solutions of goods within specific timeframes and in
case of digitally ordered goods in e-commerce delivery and
collection of cash (CoD) on behalf of the seller and such delivery
service provider includes but not limited to –
(a) Logistics services;
(b) ride-haling services;
(c) food delivery platforms; and
(d) e-commerce services;
(iib) “payment intermediary” means any third party entity including a
banking company, financial institution, a licensed foreign
exchange company or payments gateways that facilitate the
transfer of funds or payment instructions between two or more
parties to enable, process, route or settle payments in a
financial transaction, without being the ultimate source or
recipient of the payment;]
(iii) “sale of goods” includes a sale of goods for cash or on credit,
whether under written contract or not; 4[and]
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2025.
Sub-clauses (m) and (n) added by the Finance Act, 2025.
Sub-clauses (m) and (n) added by the Finance Act, 2025.
Word added by the Finance Act, 2025.
(iv) “manufacturer” means a person who is engaged in production
or manufacturing of goods, which includes—
(a) any process in which an article singly or in combination
with other articles, material, components, is either
converted into another distinct article or product is so
changed, transferred, or reshaped that it becomes
capable of being put to use differently or distinctly; or
(b) a process of assembling, mixing, cutting or preparation of
goods in any other manner; and
(v) “turnover” means—
(a) the gross sales or gross receipts, inclusive of sales tax
and federal excise duty or any trade discounts shown on
invoices, or bills, derived from the sale of goods;
(b) the gross fees for the rendering of services for giving
benefits including commissions;
(c) the gross receipts from the execution of contracts; and
(d) the company’s share of the amounts stated above of any
association of persons of which the company is a
member.]
1[ ]
2[ ]
3[ ]
154. Exports. — (1) Every authorised dealer in foreign exchange shall, at the
time of realisation of foreign exchange proceeds on account of the export of goods
Section 153A omitted by the Finance Act, 2013. Earlier it was substituted by the Finance Act, 2012,
which was inserted by the Finance Act, 2008. The omitted section 153A read as follows:
“153A. Payment to traders and distributors.— (1) Every manufacturer, at the time of sale to
distributors, dealers and wholesalers, shall collect tax at the rate specified in Part IIA of the First
Schedule, from the aforesaid persons, to whom such sales have been made.
(2) Tax credit for the tax collected under sub-section (1) shall be allowed in computing the
tax due by the person on the taxable income for the tax year in which the tax was collected.”
New section 153B inserted through Finance Act, 2019.
Section 153B omitted by the Finance Act, 2021. The omitted section read as follows:
“153B. Payment of royalty to resident persons.- (1) Every person paying an amount of royalty, in
full or in part including by way of advance, to a resident person shall deduct tax from the gross amount
payable (including Federal excise duty and provincial sales tax, if any) at the rate specified in Division
IIIB of Part III of the First Schedule.
(2) The tax deductible under sub-section (1) shall be adjustable.”
by an exporter, deduct tax 1[including advance tax] from the proceeds at the rate
specified in Division IV of Part III of the First Schedule.
2[ ]
(3) Every banking company shall, at the time of realisation of the
proceeds on account of a sale of goods to an exporter under an inland back-to-
back letter of credit or any other arrangement as prescribed by the 3[Board], deduct
tax from the amount of the proceeds at the rate specified in Division IV of Part III
of the First Schedule.
4[(3A) The Export Processing Zone Authority established under the Export
Processing Zone Authority Ordinance, 1980 (VI of 1980), shall at the time of export of
goods by an industrial undertaking located in the areas declared by the Federal
Government to be a Zone within the meaning of the aforesaid Ordinance, collect tax at
the rate specified in Division IV of Part III of the First Schedule.]
5[(3B) Every direct exporter and an export house registered under the Duty
and Tax Remission for Exports Rules, 2001 provided in Sub-Chapter 7 of Chapter
XII of the Customs Rules, 2001 6[and Export Facilitation Scheme, 2021] shall, at
the time of making payment for a firm contract to an indirect exporter defined under
the said rules, deduct tax at the rates specified in Division IV of Part III of the First
Schedule.]
7[(3C) The Collector of Customs at the time of clearing of goods exported
shall collect tax from the gross value of such goods at the rate specified in Division
IV of Part III of the First Schedule.]
(4) The tax 8[deductible] under 9[this section] shall be a 10[minimum] tax
on the income arising from the 11[transactions referred to in this section].
12[ ]
Words inserted by the Finance Act, 2024.
Sub-sections (2) omitted by the Finance Act, 2022. The omitted sub-section read as follows:
“(2) Every authorised dealer in foreign exchange shall, at the time of realisation of foreign exchange
proceeds on account of the commission due to an indenting commission agent, deduct tax from the
proceeds at the rate specified in Division IV of Part III of the First Schedule.”
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Expression inserted by the Finance Act, 2023.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2009.
The words “deducted” substituted by the Finance Act, 2012.
The word, figures, brackets and commas “sub-section (1), (3), (3A) or (3B)” substituted by the Finance
Act, 2006.
The word “final” substituted by the Finance Act, 2024.
The words ”export or sale to an exporter” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
Sub-section (5) inserted by the Finance Act, 2015.
1[ ]
2[154A. Export of Services. — (1) Every authorized dealer in foreign exchange
shall, at the time of realization of foreign exchange proceeds on account of the
following, deduct tax from the proceeds at the rates specified in Division IVA of
Part III of the First Schedule –
(a) exports of computer software or IT services or IT enabled services
3[where the exporter is registered with and duly certified by the
Pakistan Software Export Board (PSEB).];
(b) services or technical services rendered outside Pakistan or
exported from Pakistan;
(c) royalty, commission or fees derived by a resident company from a
foreign enterprise in consideration for the use outside Pakistan of any
patent, invention, model, design, secret process or formula or similar
property right, or information concerning industrial, commercial or
scientific knowledge, experience or skill made available or provided
to such enterprise;
(d) construction contracts executed outside Pakistan 4[:
(da) foreign commission due to an indenting commission agent;]
(e) other services rendered outside Pakistan as notified by the Board
from time to time;
(2) The tax deductible under this section shall be a final tax on the income
arising from the transactions referred to in this section, upon fulfilment of the
following conditions –
(a) return has been filed;
Sub-section (5) omitted by the Finance Act, 2024. The omitted sub-section read as follows:
“[(5) The provisions of sub-section (4) shall not apply to a person who opts not to be subject to final
taxation:
Provided that this sub-section shall be applicable from tax year 2015 and the option shall be
exercised every year at the time of filing of return under section 114:
Provided further that the tax deducted under this sub-section shall be minimum tax.]”
”
Section 154A inserted by the Finance Act, 2021.
The expression “in case tax credit under section 65F is not available” substituted by the Finance Act,
2022.
The expression “; and“ substituted with colon and new clause (da) inserted by the Finance Act, 2022.
1[(b) withholding tax statements for the relevant tax year have been filed if
required under the Ordinance;] and
(c) sales tax returns under Federal or Provincial laws have been filed, if
required under the law 2[:
Provided that this condition shall not apply in case of an
exporter mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of this section.]
(d) no credit for foreign taxes paid shall be allowed.
(3) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall not apply to a person who does
not fulfill the specified conditions or who opts not to be subject to final taxation:
Provided that the option shall be exercised every year at the time of
filing of return under section 114.
3[ ]
(5) The Board in consultation with State Bank of Pakistan shall prescribe
mode, manner and procedure of payment of tax under this section.
(6) The Board shall have power to include or exclude certain services for
applicability of provisions of this section.]
155. 4[Rent of immoveable] property.— (1) 5[Every] prescribed person making
a payment in full or part (including a payment by way of advance) to any person
on account of rent of immovable property (including rent of furniture and fixtures,
and amounts for services relating to such property) shall deduct tax from the gross
amount of rent paid at the rate specified in Division V of Part III of the First
Schedule.
6[Explanation.- “gross amount of rent” includes the amount referred to in sub-
section (1) or (3) of section 16, if any.]
Clause (b) substituted by the Finance Act, 2022. The substituted clause read as follows:
“(b) withholding tax statements for the relevant tax year have been filed;”
Full stop substituted with a colon and proviso added by the Finance Act, 2023.
Sub-section (4) omitted by the Finance Act, 2022. The omitted sub-section read as follows:
“(4) Where a taxpayer, while explaining the nature and source of any amount, investment, money,
valuable article, expenditure, referred to in section 111, takes into account any source of income which
is subject to final tax in accordance with the provisions of this section, he shall not be entitled to take
credit of a sum that can be reasonably attributed to the business activity or activities mentioned in sub-
section (1).]
The words “income from” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
The words, brackets, figure and comma “Subject to sub-section (2), every” substituted by the Finance
Act, 2006.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2006.
1[Explanation.— For removal of doubt, it is clarified that the sub section (1)
shall apply when a payment is made on account of rent of immoveable property
irrespective of head of income]
2[ ]
3[(3) In this section, “prescribed person” means –
(i) the Federal Government;
(ii) a Provincial Government;
(iii) 4[Local Government];
(iv) a company;
(v) a non-profit organization5[or a charitable institution];
(vi) a diplomatic mission of a foreign state; 6[ ]
7[(via) a private educational institution, a boutique, a beauty parlour, a
hospital, a clinic or a maternity home;]
8[(vib) individuals or association of persons paying gross rent of rupees one
and a half million and above in a year; or]
(vii) any other person notified by the 9[Board] for the purpose of this
section.]
156. Prizes and winnings.—(1) Every person paying 10[prize on] a prize bond,
or winnings from a raffle, lottery, 11[prize on winning a quiz, prize offered by
companies for promotion of sale,] or cross-word puzzle shall deduct tax from the
Added by the Finance Act, 2021.
Sub-section (2) omitted by the Finance Act, 2010. The omitted sub-section (2) read as follows:
“(2) The tax deducted under sub-section (1) shall be a final tax on the income from property.”
Sub-section (3) substituted by the Finance Act, 2006. The substituted sub-section (3) read as follows:
“(3) In this section, “prescribed person” means the Federal Government, a Provincial Government,
local authority, a company, a non-profit organisation or a diplomatic mission of a foreign state.”
The words “local authority” substituted by the Finance Act, 2008.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2013.
The word “or” omitted by the Finance Act, 2013.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2013.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2013.
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2002.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
gross amount paid at the rate specified in Division VI of Part III of the First
Schedule.
(2) Where a prize, referred to in sub-section (1), is not in cash, the person
while giving the prize shall collect tax on the fair market value of the prize.
1[(3) The tax 2[deductible] under sub-section (1) or collected under
3[sub-]section (2) shall be final tax on the income from prizes or winnings referred
to in the said sub-sections.]
4[156A. Petroleum Products.— (1) Every person selling petroleum products to a
petrol pump operator shall deduct tax from the amount of commission or discount
allowed to the operator at the rate specified in Division VIA of Part III of the First
schedule.
(2) The tax 5[deductible] under sub-section (1) shall be a final tax on the
income arising from the sale of petroleum products to which sub-section (1) applies.]
6[ ]
Sub-section (3) substituted by the Finance Act, 2002. The substituted sub-section (3) read as follows:
“(3) The tax deducted under sub-section (1) shall be a final tax on the prize bond or winnings.“
The words “deducted” substituted by the Finance Act, 2012.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2014.
Added by the Finance Act, 2004.
The words “deducted” substituted by the Finance Act, 2012.
6 Section 156B omitted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020 the omitted section read as
follows: 156B. Withdrawal of balance under Pension Fund.— (1) A pension fund manager making
payment from individual pension accounts, maintained under any approved Pension Fund, shall deduct
tax at the rate specified in sub-section (6) of section 12 from any amount –
(a) withdrawn before the retirement age 6[:]
6[Provided that the tax shall not be deducted in case of the eligible person suffering from any disability
as mentioned in sub-rule (2) of rule 17 of the Voluntary Pension System Rules, 2005 which renders
him unable to continue with any employment at the age which he may so elect to be treated as the
retirement age or the age as on the date of such disability if not so elected by him.]
6[Provided further that the tax shall not be deducted on the share of the nominated survivor of the
deceased eligible person and would be treated as if the eligible person had reached the age of
retirement.]
(b) withdrawn, if in excess of 6[fifty per cent] of his accumulated balance at or after the retirement
age:
6[Provided that the tax shall not be deducted in case, the balance in the eligible persons’ individual
pension account is invested in an approved income payment plan of a pension fund manager or paid
to a life insurance company for the purchase of an approved annuity plan or is transferred to another
individual pension account of the eligible person or the survivors’ pension account in case of death of
the eligible person maintained with any other pension fund manager as specified in the Voluntary
Pension System Rules, 2005.
1[ ]
2[158.Time of deduction of tax.— A person required to deduct tax from an
amount paid by the person shall deduct tax —
(a) in the case of deduction under section 151, at the time the
amount is 3[paid or] credited to the account of recipient 4[,
whichever is earlier]; and
(b) in other cases, at the time the amount is actually paid 5[;and]
6[“(c) amount actually paid shall have the meaning as may be
prescribed.”;]
Omitted by the Finance Act, 2002. The omitted section 157 read as follows:
“157. Petroleum products.- (1) Every person selling petroleum products to a petrol pump operator
shall deduct tax from the amount of commission or discount allowed to the operator at the rate
specified in Division VII of Part III of the First Schedule.
(2) The tax deducted under sub-section (1) shall be a final tax on the income arising from
the sale of petroleum products to which sub-section (1) applies.”
Substituted by the Finance Act, 2002. The substituted section 158 read as follows:
“158. Time of deduction of tax.- A person required to deduct tax from an amount paid by the person
shall deduct the tax at the earlier of –
(a) the time the amount is credited to the account of the recipient; or
(b) the time of amount is actually paid.”
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Substituted “.” By Finance Act, 2015.
Added by the Finance Act, 2015.
