PART VII
EXEMPTIONS AND TAX CONCESSIONS
41. Agricultural income. — (1) Agricultural income derived by a person shall
be exempt from tax under this Ordinance.
(2) In this section, “agricultural income” means, —
(a) any rent or revenue derived by a person from land which is
situated in Pakistan and is used for agricultural purposes;
(b) any income derived by a person from land situated in Pakistan
from —
(i) agriculture;
(ii) the performance by a cultivator or receiver of rent-in-kind
of any process ordinarily employed by such person to
render the produce raised or received by the person fit to
be taken to market; or
(iii) the sale by a cultivator or receiver of rent-in-kind of the
produce raised or received by such person, in respect of
which no process has been performed other than a
process of the nature described in sub-clause (ii); or
(c) any income derived by a person from —
(i) any building owned and occupied by the receiver of the
rent or revenue of any land described in clause (a) or (b);
(ii) any building occupied by the cultivator, or the receiver of
rent-in-kind, of any land in respect of which, or the
produce of which, any operation specified in sub-clauses
(ii) or (iii) of clause (b) is carried on,
but only where the building is on, or in the immediate vicinity of
the land and is a building which the receiver of the rent or
revenue, or the cultivator, or the receiver of the rent-in-kind by
reason of the person’s connection with the land, requires as a
dwelling-house, a store-house, or other out-building.
42. Diplomatic and United Nations exemptions. — (1) The income of an
individual entitled to privileges under the Diplomatic and Consular Privileges Act,
1972 (IX of 1972) shall be exempt from tax under this Ordinance to the extent
provided for in that Act.
(2) The income of an individual entitled to privileges under the United
Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1948 (XX of 1948), shall be exempt from
tax under this Ordinance to the extent provided for in that Act.
(3) Any pension received by a person, being a citizen of Pakistan, by
virtue of the person’s former employment in the United Nations or its specialised
agencies (including the International Court of Justice) provided the person’s salary
from such employment was exempt under this Ordinance.
43. Foreign government officials.— Any salary received by an employee of a
foreign government as remuneration for services rendered to such government
shall be exempt from tax under this Ordinance provided —
(a) the employee is a citizen of the foreign country and not a citizen
of Pakistan;
(b) the services performed by the employee are of a character
similar to those performed by employees of the Federal
Government in foreign countries; 1[and]
(c) the foreign government grants a similar exemption to
employees of the Federal Government performing similar
services in such foreign country2[.]
3[ ]
44. Exemptions under international agreements.— (1) Any Pakistan-source
income which Pakistan is not permitted to tax under a tax treaty shall be exempt
from tax under this Ordinance.
(2) Any salary received by an individual (not being a citizen of Pakistan)
shall be exempt from tax under this Ordinance to the extent provided for in an Aid
Agreement between the Federal Government and a foreign government or public
international organization, where –
Added by the Finance Act, 2002
The comma and word “,and” substituted by the Finance Act, 2002
Clause (d) omitted by the Finance Act, 2002. The omitted clause (d) read as under:
“(d) the income is subject to tax in that foreign country.”
(a) the individual is either 1[not a resident] individual or a resident
individual solely by reason of the performance of services under
the Aid Agreement;
(b) if the Aid Agreement is with a foreign country, the individual is a
citizen of that country; and
(c) the salary is paid by the foreign government or public
international organisation out of funds or grants released as aid
to Pakistan in pursuance of such Agreement.
(3) Any income received by 2[any person] engaged as a contractor,
consultant, or expert on a project in Pakistan shall be exempt from tax under this
Ordinance to the extent provided for in a bilateral or multilateral 3[ ] agreement
between the Federal Government and a foreign government or public international
organisation, where —
(a) the project is financed out of grant funds in accordance with the
agreement;
(b) the person is either a non-resident person or a resident person
solely by reason of the performance of services under the
agreement; and
(c) the income is paid out of the funds of the grant in pursuance of
the agreement.
4[(4) Federal Government may, in respect of an official development
assistance financed loans and grants-in-aid, subject to such conditions and
limitations as it may specify, exempt income of any person on a case to case basis
through a notification in the official Gazette.]
5[44A. Exemption under Foreign Investment (Promotion and Protection) Act,
2022 (XXXV of 2022). – (1) Taxes on income (including capital gains), advance
tax, withholding taxes, minimum and final taxes under this Ordinance shall, for the
period and to the extent provided in the Second and Third Schedules to the Foreign
Investment (Promotion and Protection) Act, 2022 (XXXV of 2022) in respect of
qualified investment as specified at Sr. No.1 of the First Schedule to the said Act
The words “a non-resident” substituted by the Finance Act, 2003.
The expression “a person (not being a citizen of Pakistan)” substituted by the Finance Act, 2022.
The expression “technical assistance” omitted by the Finance Act, 2022.
Sub-section (4) inserted by the Finance Act, 2022.
Section 44A inserted by the Finance Act, 2023.
or investors, be exempt or subject to tax at the rate and in the manner specified
under the said Act.
(2) All investors and shareholders of the qualified investment, their
associates and companies specified in the Second and Third Schedules to the said
Act including third party lenders on account of any loan shall also be exempt from
taxes and other provisions of this Ordinance or subject to tax at the rate and in the
manner specified under the said Act for the period and to the extent provided in
the Second and Third Schedules to the said Act.
(3) Provisions of this Ordinance relating to Anti-Avoidance, for the period
and to the extent specified in the said Act including sections 106, 106A, 108, 109
and 109A, shall not apply to the persons and amounts mentioned in sub-sections
(1) and (2).
(4) Rates of depreciation, initial allowance and pre-commencement
expenditure under sections 22, 23 and 25 as on the 20th day of March, 2022 shall
continue to be applicable for thirty years as provided in the Third Schedule to the
said Act in respect of persons mentioned in sub-sections (1) and (2).
(5) For the purpose of this section, the terms defined under the Second and
Third Schedules to the said Act shall apply mutatis mutandis to this Ordinance.]
45. President’s honours.— (1) Any allowance attached to any Honour, Award,
or Medal awarded to a person by the President of Pakistan shall be exempt from
tax under this Ordinance.
(2) Any monetary award granted to a person by the President of Pakistan
shall be exempt from tax under this Ordinance.
46. Profit on debt.— Any profit received by a non-resident person on a security
issued by a resident person shall be exempt from tax under this Ordinance
where—
(a) the persons are not associates;
(b) the security was widely issued by the resident person outside
Pakistan for the purposes of raising a loan outside Pakistan for
use in a business carried on by the person in Pakistan;
(c) the profit was paid outside Pakistan; and
(d) the security is approved by the 1[Board] for the purposes of this
section.
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
47. Scholarships.— Any scholarship granted to a person to meet the cost of
the person’s education shall be exempt from tax under this Ordinance, other than
where the scholarship is paid directly or indirectly by an associate.
48. Support payments under an agreement to live apart.—1[Any income
received by a spouse as support payment under an agreement to live apart] shall
be exempt from tax under this Ordinance.
49. Federal 2[Government,] Provincial Government, and 3[Local
Government] income.— (1) The income of the Federal Government shall be
exempt from tax under this Ordinance.
(2) The income of a Provincial Government or a 4[Local Government] in
Pakistan shall be exempt from tax under this Ordinance, other than income
chargeable under the head “Income from Business” derived by a Provincial
Government or 5[Local Government] from a business carried on outside its
jurisdictional area.
6[(3) Subject to sub-section (2), any payment received by the Federal
Government, a Provincial Government or a 7[Local Government] shall not be liable
to any collection or deduction of advance tax.]
8[(4) Exemption under this section shall not be available in the case of
corporation, company, a regulatory authority, a development authority, other body
or institution established by or under a Federal law or a Provincial law or an existing
law or a corporation, company, a regulatory authority, a development authority or
other body or institution set up, owned and controlled, either directly or indirectly,
by the Federal Government or a Provincial Government, regardless of the ultimate
destination of such income as laid down in Article 165A of the Constitution of the
Islamic Republic of Pakistan9[:]
The words “Any support payment received by a spouse under an agreement to live apart” substituted
by the Finance Act, 2002.
The word “and” substituted by the Finance Act, 2009.
The words “local authority” substituted by the Finance Act, 2008.
The words “local authority” substituted by the Finance Act, 2008.
The words “local authority” substituted by the Finance Act, 2008.
Added by the Finance Act, 2006.
The words “local authority” substituted by the Finance Act, 2008.
Added by the Finance Act, 2007.
Full stop substituted by a colon by the Finance Act, 2014.
1[Provided that the income from sale of spectrum licenses 2[and
renewal thereof] by Pakistan Telecommunication Authority on behalf
of the Federal Government after the first day of March 2014 shall be
treated as income of the Federal Government and not of the Pakistan
Telecommunication Authority.]
50. Foreign-source income of short-term resident individuals.— (1)
Subject to sub-section (2), the foreign-source income of an individual 3[ ] —
(a) who is a resident individual solely by reason of the individual’s
employment; and
(b) who is present in Pakistan for a period or periods not exceeding
three years,
shall be exempt from tax under this Ordinance.
(2) This section shall not apply to —
(a) any income derived from a business of the person established
in Pakistan; or
(b) any foreign-source income brought into or received in Pakistan
by the person.
51. Foreign-source income of returning expatriates.—4[(1)] Any foreign-
source income derived by a citizen of Pakistan in a tax year who was not a resident
individual in any of the four tax years preceding the tax year in which the individual
became a resident shall be exempt from tax under this Ordinance in the tax year
in which the individual became a resident individual and in the following tax year.
5[(2) Where a citizen of Pakistan leaves Pakistan during a tax year and
remains abroad during that tax year, any income chargeable under the head
“Salary” earned by him outside Pakistan during that year shall be exempt from tax
under this Ordinance.]
6[ ]
Added by the Finance Act, 2014.
2 The words “and renewal thereof” inserted through Finance Supplementary (Second Amendment)
Act, 2019
The brackets and words “(other than a citizen of Pakistan)” omitted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Section 51 numbered as sub-section (1) of section 51 by the Finance Act, 2003.
Added by the Finance Act, 2003.
Section 52 omitted by the Finance Act, 2002. The omitted section 52 read as follows:
“52. Non-resident shipping and airline enterprises.- (1) Subject to sub-section (2), any income of a non-
resident person, for the time being approved by the Federal Government for the purpose of this section,
53. Exemptions and tax concessions in the Second Schedule.—(1) The
income or classes of income, or persons or classes of persons specified in the
Second Schedule shall be —
(a) exempt from tax under this Ordinance, subject to any conditions
and to the extent specified therein;
(b) subject to tax under this Ordinance at such rates, which are less
than the rates specified in the First Schedule, as are specified
therein;
(c) allowed a reduction in tax liability under this Ordinance, subject
to any conditions and to the extent specified therein; or
(d) exempted from the operation of any provision of this Ordinance,
subject to any conditions and to the extent specified therein.
1[ ]
(2) The 2[Federal Government or the] 3[ ] 4[ ] 5[ ] 6[Board with the approval
of the Federal Minister-in-charge may, from time to time, pursuant to the approval
of the Economic Coordination Committee of the Cabinet] whenever circumstances
exist to take immediate action for the purposes of national security, natural
disaster, national food security in emergency situations, protection of national
economic interests in situations arising out of abnormal fluctuation in international
commodity prices, 7[ ] 8[,] implementation of bilateral and multilateral agreements
from the operation of ships and aircraft in international traffic shall be exempt from tax under this Ordinance,
other than income from ships and aircraft operated principally to transport passengers, livestock, mail, or
goods exclusively between places in Pakistan.
(2) Sub-section (1) shall not apply to a non-resident person where the person’s country of
residence does not allow a similar exemption to a resident of Pakistan.”
Sub-section (1A) omitted by the Finance Act, 2012. The omitted sub-section (1A) read as follows:-
“(1A) Where any income which is exempt from tax under any provision of the Second
Schedule, such income, as may be specified in the said Schedule and subject to such conditions
as may be specified therein, shall be included in the total income, however the tax shall not be
payable in respect of such income.”
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2022.
the expression “Federal Government” substituted by Finance Act, 2017.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2015.
The expression “Board with the approval of Federal Minister-in-charge may, from time to time
pursuant to the approval of the Economic Coordination Committee of Cabinet, ” substituted by the
Finance Act, 2018.
The words “Federal Government may” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
The words “removal of anomalies in taxes, development of backward areas” omitted by Finance
Act, 2019.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2016.
1[or granting an exemption from any tax imposed under this Ordinance including
a reduction in the rate of tax imposed under this Ordinance or a reduction in tax
liability under this Ordinance or an exemption from the operation of any provision
of this Ordinance to any international financial institution or foreign Government
owned financial institution operating under an agreement, memorandum of
understanding or any other arrangement with the Government of Pakistan] ], by
notification in the official Gazette, make such amendment in the Second Schedule
by —
(a) adding any clause or condition therein;
(b) omitting any clause or condition therein; or
(c) making any change in any clause or condition therein,
as the Government may think fit, and all such amendments shall have effect in
respect of any tax year beginning on any date before or after the commencement
of the financial year in which the notification is issued.
(3) The Federal Government shall place before the National Assembly all
amendments made by it to the Second Schedule in a financial year.
2[“(4) Any notification issued under sub-section (2) after the commencement
of the Finance Act, 2015, shall, if not earlier rescinded, stand rescinded on the
expiry of the financial year in which it was issued3[:]
4[Provided that all such notifications, except those earlier rescinded,
shall be deemed to have been in force with effect from the first day of July,
2016 and shall continue to be in force till the thirtieth day of June, 2018, if not
earlier rescinded:
Provided further that all notifications issued on or after the first day
of July, 2016 and placed before the National Assembly as required under sub-
section (3) shall continue to remain in force till the thirtieth day of June, 2018,
if not earlier rescinded by the Federal Government or the National Assembly.]
54. Exemptions and tax provisions in other laws.—No provision in any other
law providing for —
(a) an exemption from any tax imposed under this Ordinance;
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2016.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2015.
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2017.
Added by the Finance Act, 2017
(b) a reduction in the rate of tax imposed under this Ordinance;
(c) a reduction in tax liability of any person under this Ordinance; or
(d) an exemption from the operation of any provision of this
Ordinance,
shall have legal effect unless also provided for in this Ordinance 1[.]
2[ ]
55. Limitation of exemption.— (1) Where any income is exempt from tax
under this Ordinance, the exemption shall be, in the absence of a specific provision
to the contrary contained in this Ordinance, limited to the original recipient of that
income and shall not extend to any person receiving any payment wholly or in part
out of that income.
3[ ]
The colon substituted by the Finance Act, 2008.
Proviso omitted by the Finance Act, 2008. The omitted proviso read as follows:
“Provided that any exemption from income tax or a reduction in the rate of tax or a reduction in
tax liability of any person or an exemption from the operation of any provision of this Ordinance
provided in any other law and in force on the commencement of this Ordinance shall continue to be
available unless withdrawn.”
Sub-section (2) omitted by the Finance Act, 2003. Omitted sub-section (2) read as follows: -
“(2) Where a person’s income from business is exempt from tax under this Ordinance as a
result of a tax concession, any loss sustained in the period of the exemption shall not be set off
against the person’s income chargeable to tax after the exemption expires.”
