PART III
APPEALS
1[ ]
2[ ]
127. Appeal to the Commissioner (Appeals). — 3[(1) 4[ ] 5[Any person, other than
State-Owned Enterprise (SOE),] dissatisfied with any order passed by a
Commissioner or an6[Officer of Inland Revenue] under 7[sub-section (2A) of section
120,] section 121,122, 143, 144, 8[162,] 170, 182, 9[ ] 10[or 205], or an order under sub-
section (1) of section 161 holding a person to be personally liable to pay an amount of
tax, or an order under clause (f) of sub-section (3) of section 172 11[declaring] a person
to be the representative of a non-resident person [or an order giving effect to any finding
or directions in any order made under this Part by the Commissioner (Appeals),
1 Inserted through The Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 2024.
2 Section 126A omitted by the Finance Act, 2025. The omitted section read as follows:
“ 126A. Pecuniary jurisdiction in appeals. — (1) 2[Notwithstanding anything contained in any
other provision of this Ordinance,– ]
(a) an appeal to the Commissioner (Appeals) shall lie where the value of assessment of tax or,
as the case may be, refund of tax does not exceed twenty million rupees; or
(b) an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal Inland Revenue shall lie where the value of assessment
of tax or, as the case may be, refund of tax exceeds twenty million rupees
2[Explanation. – For the purposes of this section value of assessment of tax means the net increase
in tax liability of a person as a result of order sought to be assailed and value of refund means net
reduction in refund as a result of order sought to be assailed.]
(2) A person or, as the case may be, officer of Inland Revenue aggrieved by an order of
the Commissioner (Appeals) in Cases under clause (a) of sub-section (1) may file a reference before
the High Court in accordance with section 133.
(3) A person or, as the case may be, officer of Inland Revenue aggrieved by an order of
the Appellate Tribunal in cases under clause (b) of sub-section (1) may file a reference before the
High Court in accordance with section 133.
(4) The cases pending before the Commissioner (Appeals) having the value of assessment
of tax or, as the case may be, refund of tax exceeding twenty million rupees shall on 2[or before the
31st day of December], 2024 stand transferred to the Appellate Tribunal Inland Revenue.
(5) All cases transferred from the Commissioner (Appeals) to the Appellate Tribunal under
sub-section (4) shall be decided by the Appellate Tribunal within the period provided for under section
132 which period shall commence from 2[the date of transfer under sub-section (4).]”
Sub-section (1) substituted by the Finance Act, 2002. The substituted sub-section (1) read as follows:
“(1) Any person dissatisfied with any proceeding under this Ordinance in which an order has
been issued by a Commissioner of Income Tax (other than the Commissioner (Appeals)) or a
taxation officer may prefer an appeal to the Commissioner (Appeals) against the order.”
The word “Any” substituted by the Finance Act, 2024.
The expression “Subject to section 126A, any person” substituted by the Finance Act, 2025.
The words “Taxation officer” substituted by the Finance Act, 2014.
7 The expressions inserted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2004.
The figures and commas “183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188 and 189” omitted by the Finance Act, 2010.
The word and figure “or 189” substituted by the Finance Act, 2009.
The word “treating” substituted by the Finance Act, 2003
Appellate Tribunal, High Court or Supreme Court], or an order under section 221 refusing
to rectify the mistake, either in full or in part, as claimed by the taxpayer or an order having
the effect of enhancing the assessment or reducing a refund or otherwise increasing the
liability of the person 1[, 2[ 3[ ] ]may prefer an appeal to the Commissioner (Appeals)
against the order] 4[:
Provided that an aggrieved person under sub-section (1) may have the option to
either file appeal before Commissioner Inland Revenue (Appeals) directly or may
surrender his right of appeal before Commissioner Inland Revenue (Appeals) and avail
the next statutory appellate forum by filing the appeal directly before the Appellate
Tribunal Inland Revenue.]
5[ ]
6[(2) No appeal under sub-section (1), shall be made by a taxpayer against
an order of assessment unless the taxpayer has paid the amount of tax due under
sub section (1) of section 137.]
(3) An appeal under sub-section (1) shall —
(a) be in the prescribed form;
(b) be verified in the prescribed manner;
(c) state precisely the grounds upon which the appeal is made;
(d) be accompanied by the prescribed fee specified in sub-section
(4); and
(e) be lodged with the Commissioner (Appeals) within the time set
out in sub-section (5).
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2011.
The words “a provisional” substituted by the word “an” by the Finance Act, 2012.
The expression “except an assessment order under section 122C,” omitted by the Finance
Ordinance, 2017.
Full stop substituted and new proviso added by the Finance Act, 2025.
Sub-section (2) substituted by the Finance Ordinance, 2002. The substituted sub-section (2) read as
follows:
“No appeal may be made by a taxpayer against an assessment unless the amount of tax due under
the assessment that is not in dispute and fifteen percent of the disputed tax has been paid by the
taxpayer.”
6 Sub-section (2) substituted by the Finance Act, 2021. The substituted sub-section (2) read as follows:
“(2) No appeal under sub-section (1), shall be made by a taxpayer against an order of
assessment unless the taxpayer has paid,—
(a) the amount of tax due under sub-section (1) of section 137 and
(b) no appeal under sub-section (1) shall be made by a taxpayer against] an order of
assessment unless the taxpayer has paid the amount of tax due under sub-section (1)
of section 137.”
1[(3A) The Board may prescribe mechanism for electronic filing of the
appeals.]
(4) The prescribed fee 2[shall be] —
3[(a) in the case of appeal against an assessment-
(i) where the appellant is a company, five thousand rupees; or
(ii) where the appellant is not a company, two thousand and five
hundred rupees; or]
(b) in any other case —
(i) where the appellant is a company, 4[five] thousand rupees; or
(ii) where the appellant is not a company, 5[one thousand]
rupees.
6[(5) An appeal shall be preferred to the Commissioner (Appeals) within
thirty days of the following—
(a) where the appeal relates to any assessment or penalty, the date
of service of the notice of demand relating to the said assessment
or penalty, as the case may be; and
(b) in any other case, the date on which the order to be appealed
against is served.]
(6) The Commissioner (Appeals) may, upon application in writing by the
appellant, admit an appeal after the expiration of the period specified in
sub-section (5) if the Commissioner (Appeals) is satisfied that the appellant was
prevented by sufficient cause from lodging the appeal within that period.
128. Procedure in appeal.— (1) The Commissioner (Appeals) shall give notice
of the day fixed for the hearing of the appeal to the appellant and to the
Commissioner against whose order the appeal has been made.
Sub-section (3) inserted by the Finance Act, 2021.
The word “is” substituted by the Finance Act, 2002
3 Clause (a) substituted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020 the substituted clause read
as follows: “(a) in the case of an appeal against an assessment, 3[one thousand rupees]3[ ]; or”
4 The word “one” substituted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
5 The word “two hundred” substituted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
Sub-section (5) substituted by the Finance Act, 2002. The substituted sub-section (5) read as follows:
“
“(5) An appeal shall be lodged with the Commissioner (Appeals) –
(a) where the appeal relates to an assessment order, within thirty days of the date
of service of the demand relating to the assessment; or
(b) in any other case, within thirty days of the date of service of the notice of the
decision or determination appealed against.”
1[(1A) Where in a particular case, the Commissioner (Appeals) is of the
opinion that the recovery of tax levied under this Ordinance, shall cause undue
hardship to the taxpayer, he, after affording opportunity of being heard to the
Commissioner against whose order appeal has been made, may stay the recovery
of such tax for a period not exceeding thirty days in aggregate.]
2[“(1AA) The Commissioner (Appeals), after affording opportunity of being
heard to the Commissioner against whose order appeal has been made, may stay
the recovery of such tax for a further period of thirty days, provided that the order
on appeal shall be passed within the said period of thirty days.”]
(2) The Commissioner (Appeals) may adjourn the hearing of the appeal
from time to time.
(3) The Commissioner (Appeals) may, before the hearing of an appeal,
allow an appellant to file any new ground of appeal not specified in the grounds of
appeal already filed by the appellant where the Commissioner (Appeals) is
satisfied that the omission of the ground from the form of the appeal was not wilful
or unreasonable.
(4) The Commissioner (Appeals) may, before disposing of an appeal, call
for such particulars as the Commissioner (Appeals) may require respecting the
matters arising in the appeal or cause further enquiry to be made by the
Commissioner.
(5) The Commissioner (Appeals) shall not admit any documentary
material or evidence which was not produced before the Commissioner unless the
Commissioner (Appeals) is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient
cause from producing such material or evidence before the Commissioner.
129. Decision in appeal.— (1) In disposing of an appeal lodged under section
127, the Commissioner (Appeals) may –
3[(a) make an order to confirm, modify or annul the assessment order
after examining such evidence as required by him respecting
the matters arising in appeal or causing such further enquires to
be made as he deems fit; or]
(b) in any other case, make such order as the Commissioner
(Appeals) thinks fit.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2012.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2015
Clause (a) substituted by the Finance Act, 2005. The original clause (a) read as follows:
(a) in the case of an appeal against an assessment order –
(i) make an order to set aside the assessment order and direct the Commissioner to make a
new assessment order in accordance with any directions or recommendations of the
Commissioner (Appeals); or
(ii) make an order to confirm, modify or annul the assessment order; or
(2) The Commissioner (Appeals) shall not increase the amount of any
assessment order or decrease the amount of any refund unless the appellant has
been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against such increase or
decrease, as the case may be.
(3) Where, as the result of an appeal, any change is made in the
assessment of an association of persons or a new assessment of an association
of persons is ordered to be made, the Commissioner (Appeals) may authorise the
Commissioner to amend accordingly any assessment order made on a member of
the association and the time limit in sub-section (2) of section 122 shall not apply
to the making such amended assessment.
(4) As soon as practicable after deciding an appeal, the Commissioner
(Appeals) shall 1[specify in the order the amount of tax upheld and] serve 2[ ] his
order on the appellant and the Commissioner 3[:]
4[Provided that such order shall be passed not later than one hundred and
twenty days from the date of filing of appeal or within an extended period of sixty
days, for reasons to be recorded in writing by the Commissioner (Appeals):
Provided further that any period during which the hearing of an appeal is
adjourned at the request of the appellant or is postponed due to any appeal or
proceedings or stay order, remand or alternative dispute resolution proceedings or
for any other reason, shall be excluded in the computation of the aforementioned
periods.]
5[ ]
6[ ]
7[ ]
1 The words inserted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
The words “notice of” omitted by the Finance Act, 2002
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2009.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2009.
Sub-section (5) omitted by the Finance Act, 2012. The omitted sub-section (5) read as follows:
“(5) Where the Commissioner (Appeals) has not made an order on an appeal before the
expiration of 5[four] months from the end of the month in which the appeal was lodged, the relief
sought by the appellant in the appeal shall be treated as having been given and all the provisions of
this Ordinance shall have effect accordingly.
Sub-section (6) omitted by the Finance Act, 2012. The omitted sub-section (6) read as follows:
“(6) For the purposes of sub-section (5), any period during which the hearing of an appeal
is adjourned on the request of the appellant shall be excluded in the computation of the period of
four months referred to in that sub-section.”
Sub-section (7) omitted by the Finance Act, 2012. The omitted sub-section (7) read as follows:
“(7) The provisions of sub-section (5) shall not apply unless a notice by the appellant stating
that no order under sub-section (1) has been made is personally served by the appellant on the
Commissioner (Appeals) not less than thirty days before the expiration of the period of four months.”
1[ ]
Section 130 substituted through Tax Laws (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 2019 dated 26th
December, 2019, the substituted section read as follows:
“130. Appointment of the Appellate Tribunal.—1[(1) There shall be established an Appellate Tribunal to
be called the Appellate Tribunal Inland Revenue to exercise the powers and perform the functions conferred
on the Appellate Inland Revenue tribunal by this Ordinance,
(2) The Inland Revenue Appellate Tribunal shall consist of a chairman and such other judicial
and accountant members as are appointed in such numbers and in the manner as the Prime Minister may
prescribe by the rules.]
(3) A person may be appointed as a judicial member of the Appellate Tribunal if the person
–
(a) has exercised the powers of a District Judge and is qualified to be a Judge of the
High Court; 1[ 1[or] ]
(b) is or has been an advocate of a High Court and is qualified to be a Judge of the
High Court 1[ 1[.] ]
1[ 1[ ] ]
1[(4) A person may be appointed as an accountant member of an appellate tribunal if,—
(a) he is an officer of Inland Revenue 1[Service] equivalent to the rank of Regional
Commissioner; 1[ ]
(b) a Commissioner Inland Revenue or Commissioner Inland Revenue (Appeals)
having at least 1[three] years experience as Commissioner or Collector 1[; 1[ ] ]
1[(c) a person who has, for a period of not less than ten years, practiced
professionally as a chartered accountant within the meaning of the Chartered
Accountants Ordinance, 1961 (X of 1961)1[;or]
1[(d) a person who has, for a period of not less than ten years, practiced
professionally as a cost and management accountant within the meaning of
Cost and Management Accountants Act,1966 (XIV of 1966).]
(5) The Federal Government shall appoint a member of the Appellate Tribunal as
Chairperson of the Tribunal1[and, except in special circumstances, the person appointed should be a
judicial member]1[ ].
(6) The powers and functions of the Appellate Tribunal shall be exercised and discharged
by Benches constituted from members of the Tribunal by the Chairperson of the Tribunal.
(7) Subject to sub-section (8), a Bench shall consist of not less than two members of the
Appellate Tribunal and shall be constituted so as to contain an equal number of judicial and accountant
members, or so that the number of members of one class does not exceed the number of members of
the other class by more than one.
(8) The Federal Government may direct that all or any of the powers of the Appellate
Tribunal shall be exercised by —
(a) any one member; or
(b) more members than one, jointly or severally.
1[(8A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (7) and (8), the 1[Chairperson] may
constitute as many benches consisting of a single member as he may deem necessary to hear such
cases or class of cases as the Federal Government may by order in writing, specify.]
1[(8AA) The 1[Chairperson] or other member of the Appellate Tribunal authorized, in this behalf by
the 1[Chairperson] may, sitting singly, dispose of any case where the amount of tax or penalty involved does
not exceed 1[one] million rupees.]
(9) Subject to sub-section (10), if the members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point,
the point shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority.
(10) If the members of a 1[Bench] are equally divided on a point, they shall state the point
on which they differ and the case shall be referred by the Chairperson for hearing on that point by one
or more other members of the Appellate Tribunal, and the point shall be decided according to the
opinion of the majority of the members of the Tribunal who have heard the case including those who
first heard it.
1[130. Appellate Tribunal.— (1) There shall be established an Appellate Tribunal
Inland Revenue hereinafter called as the Appellate Tribunal to exercise jurisdiction,
conferred on it under this Ordinance:
Provided that the existing members including Chairman of the Appellate
Tribunal shall continue to hold office, on the same terms and conditions as
applicable to them prior to the commencement of the Tax Laws (Amendment) Act,
2024 ( of 2024), till the completion of their term of office unless resigned or
removed earlier on the grounds provided in the proviso to sub-section (5).
(2) The Appellate Tribunal shall consist of members who shall be
appointed by the Federal Government in such numbers, in accordance with such
(11) If there are an equal number of members of the Appellate Tribunal, the Federal
Government may appoint an additional member for the purpose of deciding the case on which there is
a difference of opinion.
(12) Subject to this Ordinance, the Appellate Tribunal shall have the power to regulate its
own procedure, and the procedure of Benches of the Tribunal in all matters arising out of the discharge
of its functions including the places at which the Benches shall hold their sittings.”
Section 130 substituted through The Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 2024. The Substituted section
read as follows:
“130. Appellate Tribunal.- (1) There shall be established an Appellate Tribunal to be called the
Appellate Tribunal Inland Revenue to exercise the powers and perform the functions conferred on the
Appellate Tribunal Inland Revenue by this Act.
(2) The Appellate Tribunal Inland Revenue shall consist of a chairman and such other judicial and
accountant members who shall be appoints in such numbers and in such manner as the Prime Minister
may prescribe by rules, which may be made and shall take effect notwithstanding anything contained
in section 237 or any other law or rules for the time being in force.
(3) No person shall be appointed as judicial member of an Appellate Tribunal Inland Revenue
unless he -
(a) has been a Judge of a High Court;
(b) is or has been a District Judge; or
(c) is an advocate of a High Court with a standing of not less than ten years; or
(d) possesses such other qualification as may be prescribed under sub-section (2) of this
section.
(4) No person shall be appointed as an accountant member of a Appellate Tribunal Inland Revenue
unless he -
(a) is an officer of the Inland Revenue Service equivalent in rank to that of 1[Chief
Commissioner Inland Revenue];
(b) is a Commissioner Inland Revenue or Commissioner Inland Revenue (Appeals) having
not less than three years experience as Commissioner 1[ ];
(c) has for a period of not less than ten years practiced professionally as a chartered
accountant within the meaning of the Chartered Accountants’ Ordinance, 1961 (X of
1961); or
(d) has for a period of not less than ten years practiced professionally as a cost and
management accountant within the meaning of the Cost and Management Accountant’
Act, 1966 (XIV of 1966).
(5) The constitution, functioning of benches and procedure of the Appellate Tribunal Inland
Revenue shall be regulated by rules which the Prime Minister may prescribe.
(6) The rules in respect of the matters covered under this section made prior to commencement of
the Tax Laws (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 2019 shall continue in force unless amended or
repealed.]”
procedure and on such terms and conditions as the Federal Government may
prescribe by rules, which shall be made and take effect notwithstanding anything
contained in section 237 of this Ordinance or the Federal Public Service
Commission Ordinance, 1977 (XLV of 1977) or any other law or rules, for the time
being in force.
(3) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as a member of the
Appellate Tribunal, if he —
(a) is an advocate of a High Court for not less than fifteen years and
possesses such other qualifications as may be prescribed by rules
under this section;
1[(b) has, for an aggregate period of not less than ten years, been –
(i) in practice as a chartered accountant, either individually or in a
firm of the chartered accountants, within the meaning of
Chartered Accountants Ordinance, 1961 (X of 1961); or
(ii) a chartered accountant, within the meaning of the Chartered
Accountants Ordinance, 1961 (X of 1961), and has been in
employment of a chartered accountant in practice as specified
in sub-clause (i) above at least for a period of ten years;]
(c) has for a period of not less than ten years practiced professionally as
a cost and management accountant within the meaning of the Cost
and Management Accountants Act, 1966 (XIV of 1966);
(d) is an officer of the Inland Revenue in BS-21 or above; or
(e) is an officer of the Inland Revenue in BS-20, having served in such
grade for three years or more.
(4) The Federal Government shall appoint any member possessing
qualifications provided in clauses (a), (13) and (c) of sub-section (3) as Chairman
of the Appellate Tribunal. The Chairman shall hold office for a period of three years
provided that the Federal Government may reappoint the Chairman for such
further term or terms as it may deem appropriate.
(5) The members including the Chairman shall cease to hold office on
attaining the age of sixty-two years provided that the members falling under
clauses (c) and (d) of sub-section (3) shall cease to hold office on attaining the age
of superannuation, under the law regulating their service:
Clause (b) substituted by the Finance Act, 2025. The substituted clause read as follows:
“(b) has for a period of not less than ten years practiced professionally as a chartered accountant
within the meaning of the Chartered Accountants’ Ordinance, 1961 (X of 1961);”
Provided that a member including the Chairman may resign or may be
removed by the Federal Government, on the recommendation of performance
review committee, to be constituted by the rules made under sub-section (2), at
any time before the expiry of his term or attaining the age of superannuation, as
the case may be, on grounds, interalia, of inefficiency or misconduct, as prescribed
by the rules made under sub-section (2).
(6) The procedure of the Appellate Tribunal Inland Revenue including
constitution of benches, case management system, distribution of cases and other
matters ancillary or incidental thereto shall be regulated by the rules made under
sub-section (2).]
1[131. Appeal to the Appellate Tribunal. — 2[(1) Where the taxpayer, or the
Commissioner objects to an order passed by the Commissioner (Appeals), the
Section 131 substituted through The Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 2024. The Substituted section
read as follows:
“131. Appeal to the Appellate Tribunal.— (1) Where the 1[taxpayer] or Commissioner objects to an order
passed by the Commissioner (Appeals), the 1[taxpayer] or Commissioner may appeal to the Appellate
Tribunal against such order.
(2) An appeal under sub-section (1) shall be –
(a) in the prescribed form;
(b) verified in the prescribed manner;
(c) accompanied 1[, except in case of an appeal preferred by the Commissioner,] by the
prescribed fee specified in sub-section (3); and
1[(d) preferred to the Appellate Tribunal within sixty days of the date of service of order of the
Commissioner (Appeals) on the taxpayer or the Commissioner, as the case may be.]
1[(3) The prescribed fee shall be five thousand rupees in case of a company and two
thousand rupees in case other than a company.]
(4) The Appellate Tribunal may, upon application in writing, admit an appeal after the
expiration of the period specified in clause (d) of sub-section (2) if it is satisfied that the person appealing
was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal within that period.
1[(5) Notwithstanding that an appeal has been filed under this section, tax shall, unless
recovery thereof has been stayed by the Appellate Tribunal, be payable in accordance with the
assessment made in the case:
1[Provided that if on filing of application in a particular case, the Appellate Tribunal is of the
opinion that the recovery of tax levied under this Ordinance and upheld by the Commissioner (Appeals),
shall cause undue hardship to the taxpayer, the Tribunal, after affording opportunity of being heard to
the Commissioner, may stay the recovery of such tax for a period not exceeding one hundred and
eighty days in aggregate 1[:]
1[Provided further that where recovery of tax has been stayed under this section, such stay
order shall cease to have effect on expiration of the said period of one hundred and eighty days
following the date on which the stay order was made and the Commissioner shall proceed to recover
the said tax: ]
Provided further that in computing the aforesaid period of one hundred and eighty days, the
period, if any, for which the recovery of tax was stayed by a High Court, shall be excluded.]”.
Sub-section (1) substituted by the Finance Act, 2025. The substituted sub-section read as follows:
“(1) Subject to section 126A, any person, other than an SOE, aggrieved by any order passed by an
officer of Inland Revenue or Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or the Board 2[ ] under this
Ordinance or the rules made thereunder may, within thirty days of the receipt of such order, prefer
an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal or, as the case may be, a reference to the High Court:
taxpayer or Commissioner may appeal to the Appellate Tribunal against such order
within thirty days of the receipt of such order:
Provided that the taxpayer may directly appeal against the order of the
Officer Inland Revenue or the Commissioner as the case may be to the Appellate
Tribunal by exercising the option as provided in sub-section (1) of section 127.]
(2) An appeal under sub-section (1) shall be —
(a) in the prescribed form;
(b) verified in the prescribed manner;
(c) accompanied, by the prescribed fee specified in sub-section (3); and
(d) preferred to the Appellate Tribunal within thirty days of the date of
service of order on the taxpayer.
(3) The prescribed fee shall be twenty thousand rupees in case of a
company and five thousand rupees in case other than a company.
(4) The Appellate Tribunal may, upon application in writing, admit an
appeal after the expiration of the period specified in clause (d) of sub-section (2) if
it is satisfied that the person preferring appeal was prevented by sufficient cause
from filing the appeal within that period.
(5) Notwithstanding that an appeal has been filed under this section, tax
shall, unless recovery thereof has been stayed by the Appellate Tribunal, be
payable in accordance with the assessment made in the case:
Provided that on filing of application in a particular case, the Appellate
Tribunal may after affording an opportunity of being heard to the Commissioner
having jurisdiction, for reasons to be recorded, stay the recovery of tax for ninety
days:
Provided further that the stay order shall cease to have effect, and the
Commissioner shall be entitled to recover tax, if the taxpayer does not adhere to
the hearing schedule for the appeal, as determined by the Appellate Tribunal in
accordance with the rules made under sub-section (2) of section 130:
Provided also that where an appeal is not decided within the statutory
period by the Appellate Tribunal, the stay order under the second proviso shall not
cease to have effect till finalization of the appeal by the Appellate Tribunal.]
Provided that where sub-section (11) of section 134A apply, an SOE may prefer an appeal
under this sub-section.”
1[132. Decision of appeals by the Appellate Tribunal. — (1) The Appellate
Tribunal shall decide the appeal within ninety days of its filing:
Provided that appeals pending before the Appellate Tribunal on the date
of commencement of the Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 2024 (ACT NO. V of 2024),
shall be decided within one hundred and eighty days:
Provided further that where an appeal is not decided within the aforesaid
period, the Appellate Tribunal shall seek condonation from the Minister of Law and
Justice and such condonation shall not extend beyond ninety days.
(2) At the first hearing of appeal, the Appellate Tribunal shall —
(a) bring to the notice of the taxpayer, the provisions relating to
alternative dispute resolution under section 134A of this Ordinance;
and
(b) if the taxpayer declines the option of alternative dispute resolution
and wishes to continue with the appeal, fix date or dates for hearing
and decision of the appeal in consultation with the taxpayer and
Commissioner and in accordance with the rules.
Section 132 substituted through The Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 2024. The Substituted section read
as follows:
“132. Disposal of appeals by the Appellate Tribunal.— (1) The Appellate Tribunal may, before
disposing of an appeal, call for such particulars as it may require in respect of the matters arising on
the appeal or cause further enquiry to be made by the Commissioner.
1[(2) The Appellate Tribunal shall afford an opportunity of being heard to the parties to the appeal
and, in case of default by any of the party on the date of hearing, the Tribunal 1[ ] may proceed ex parte
to decide the appeal on the basis of the available record.]
1[(2A) The Appellate Tribunal shall decide the appeal within six months of its filing;]
(3) Where the appeal relates to an assessment order, the Appellate Tribunal may, 1[without
prejudice to the powers specified in sub-section (2),] make an order to —
(a) affirm, modify or annul the assessment order; or
1[ ]
1[(c) remand the case to the Commissioner or the Commissioner (Appeals) for making such
enquiry or taking such action as the Tribunal may direct.]
(4) The Appellate Tribunal shall not increase the amount of any assessment 1[or penalty] or
decrease the amount of any refund unless the taxpayer has been given a reasonable opportunity of
showing cause against such increase or decrease, as the case may be.
(5) Where, as the result of an appeal, any change is made in the assessment of an association of
persons or a new assessment of an association of persons is ordered to be made, the Appellate
Tribunal may authorise the Commissioner to amend accordingly any assessment order made on a
member of the association and the time limit in sub-section (2) of section 122 shall not apply to the
making of such amended assessment.
(6) Where the appeal relates to a decision other than in respect of an assessment, the Appellate
Tribunal may make an order to affirm, vary or annul the decision, and issue such consequential
directions as the case may require.
1[(7) The Appellate Tribunal shall communicate its order to the taxpayer and the Commissioner.]
1[ ]
1[ ]
(10) Save as provided in section 133, the decision of the Appellate Tribunal on an appeal shall be
final.”
(3) The Appellate Tribunal shall ensure strict adherence by the taxpayer
and the Commissioner, to the hearing schedule as prescribed, and shall hear and
decide the appeal on the date or dates fixed, and no adjournment shall be granted,
except —
(a) where there are compelling reasons for adjournment, to be recorded
by the Appellate Tribunal; and
(b) on mandatory payment of such cost as the Appellate Tribunal may
deem fit, which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees.
(4) Where the appeal relates to an assessment order, the Appellate
Tribunal may, without prejudice to the powers specified in sub-section (3), make
an order to —
(a) affirm, modify or annul the assessment order;
(b) remand the case to the Commissioner for making such enquiry or
taking such action as the Tribunal may direct; or
(c) make such order as the Appellate Tribunal may deem fit.
(5) The Appellate Tribunal shall not increase the amount of any
assessment or penalty or decrease the amount of any refund unless the taxpayer
has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against such increase
or decrease, as the case may be.
(6) Where, as the result of an appeal, any change is made in the
assessment of an association of persons or a new assessment of an association
of persons is ordered to be made, the Appellate Tribunal may authorize the
Commissioner to amend accordingly any assessment order made on a member of
the association and the time limit in sub-section (2) of section 122 shall not apply
to the making of such amended assessment.
(7) Where the appeal relates to a decision other than in respect of an
assessment, the Appellate Tribunal may make an order to affirm, vary or annul the
decision, and issue such consequential directions as the case may require.
(8) The Appellate Tribunal shall communicate its order to the taxpayer
and the Commissioner.
(9) Save as provided in section 133, the decision of the Appellate
Tribunal on an appeal shall be final.]
1[ ]
Section 133 substituted by the Finance Act, 2005. The original section 133 read as follows:
133. Reference to High Court.- (1) Where the Appellate Tribunal has made an order on an appeal under
section132, the taxpayer or Commissioner may, by application in such form and accompanied by such
documents as may be prescribed, require the Appellate Tribunal to refer any question of law arising out of such
order to the High Court.
(2) An application under sub-section (1) shall be made within ninety days of the date on which the taxpayer
or Commissioner, as the case may be, was served with the Appellate Tribunal’s order.
(3) Where, on an application under sub-section (1), the Appellate Tribunal is satisfied that a question of law
arises out of its order, it shall, within ninety days of receipt of the application, draw up a statement of the case
and refer it to the High Court.
(4) Where, on an application under sub-section (1), the Appellate Tribunal refuses to state the case on the
ground that no question of law arises, the taxpayer or the Commissioner, as the case may be, may apply to the
High Court and the High Court may, if it is not satisfied with the correctness of the decision of the Appellate
Tribunal, frame a question of law for its consideration.
(5) An application under sub-section (4) shall be made within one-hundred and twenty days from the date
on which the taxpayer or Commissioner, as the case may be, was served with order of the refusal.
(6) Sub-sections (10) through (14) shall apply to a question of law framed by the High Court in the same
manner as they apply to a reference made under sub-section (1).
(7) If, on an application under sub-section (1), the Appellate Tribunal rejects the application on the ground
that it is time-barred, the taxpayer or Commissioner may apply to the High Court and, if the High Court is not
satisfied with the correctness of the Appellate Tribunal’s decision, the Court may require the Appellate Tribunal
to treat the application as made within the time allowed under sub-section (2).
(8) An application under sub-section (7) shall be made within ninety days from the date on which the
taxpayer or Commissioner, as the case may be, was served with order of the rejection.
(9) If the High Court is not satisfied that the statement in a case referred under sub-section (3) is sufficient
to enable it to determine the question raised thereby, the Court may refer the case back to the Appellate Tribunal
to make such modification therein as the Court may direct.
(10) A reference to the High Court under this section shall be heard by a Bench of not less than two Judges
of the High Court and, in respect of the reference, the provisions of section 98 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 (V of 1908) shall apply, so far as may be, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
(11) The High Court upon hearing a reference under this section shall decide the questions of law raised by
the reference and deliver judgment thereon containing the grounds on which such decision is founded.
(12) A copy of the judgment of the High Court shall be sent under the seal of the Court and the signature of
the Registrar to the Appellate Tribunal which shall pass such orders as are necessary to dispose of the case
conformably to such judgment.
(13) The costs of a reference to the High Court under this section shall be at the discretion of the Court.
(14) Where a reference relates to an assessment, the tax due under the assessment shall be payable in
accordance with the assessment, unless recovery of the tax has been stayed by the High Court.
(15) Section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1908 (IX of 1908) shall apply to an application under sub-section
(1).
(16) An application under sub-section (1) by a person other than the Commissioner shall be
accompanied by a fee of one hundred rupees.”
1[133. Reference to High Court. — (1) 2[ ] 3[Within sixty] days of the
communication of the order of the Appellate Tribunal 4[ ], the aggrieved person or
the Commissioner may file a reference, in the prescribed form along with a
statement of the case, before the High Court, stating any question of law 5[ ] arising
out of such order:
Provided that the applicant shall also file complete record of the Appellate
Tribunal 6[ ] 7[ ] within fifteen days of preferring an application under this section.
Section 133 substituted through The Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 2024. The Substituted section
read as follows:
“133. Reference to High Court.— (1) Within ninety days of the communication of the order of the
Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (7) of section 132, the aggrieved person or the Commissioner
may prefer an application, in the prescribed form along with a statement of the case, to the High Court,
stating any question of law arising out of such order.
(2) The statement to the High Court referred to in sub-section (1), shall set out the facts, the
determination of the Appellate Tribunal and the question of law which arises out of its order.
(3) Where, on an application made under sub-section (1), the High Court is satisfied that a question
of law arises out of the order referred to in sub-section (1), it may proceed to hear the case.
(4) A reference to the High Court under this section shall be heard by a Bench of not less than two
judges of the High Court and, in respect of the reference, the provisions of section 98 of the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act V of 1908), shall apply, so far as may be, notwithstanding anything contained
in any other law for the time being in force.
(5) The High Court upon hearing a reference under this section shall decide the question of law
raised by the reference and pass judgment thereon specifying the grounds on which such judgment is
based and the Tribunal’s order shall stand modified accordingly. The Court shall send a copy of the
judgment under the seal of the Court to the Appellate Tribunal.
(6) Notwithstanding that a reference has been made to the High Court, the tax shall be payable in
accordance with the order of the Appellate Tribunal:
Provided that, if the amount of tax is reduced as a result of the judgment in the reference by the
High Court and the amount of tax found refundable, the High Court may, on application by the
Commissioner within thirty days of the receipt of the judgment of the High Court that he wants to prefer
petition for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, make an order authorizing the Commissioner to
postpone the refund until the disposal of the appeal by the Supreme Court.
(7) Where recovery of tax has been stayed by the High Court by an order, such order shall cease
to have effect on the expiration of a period of six months following the day on which it was made unless
the appeal is decided or such order is withdrawn by the High Court earlier.
(8) Section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1908 (IX of 1908), shall apply to an application made to the High
Court under sub-section (1).
(9) An application under sub-section (1) by a person other than the Commissioner shall be
accompanied by a fee of one hundred rupees.”
The word “Within” substituted by the Finance Act, 2024.
The expression “Subject to section 126A, within thirty” substituted by the Finance Act, 2025.
The expression “or, as the case may be, the Commissioner (Appeals)” omitted by the Finance Act,
2025.
The expression “or a mixed question of law and facts” omitted by the Finance Act, 2025.
Expression inserted by the Finance Act, 2024.
The expression “or, as the case may be, the Commissioner (Appeals)” omitted by the Finance Act,
2025.
1[ ] 2[ ]
(2) The statement to the High Court referred to in sub-section (1), shall set
out the facts, the determination of the Appellate Tribunal 3[ ] 4[ ] and the question
of law 5[ ] which arises out of its order.
(3) Where, on an application made under sub-section (1), the High Court
is satisfied that a question of law 6[ ] arises out of such order referred to in sub-
section (1), it may proceed to hear the case.
(4) A reference to the High Court under this section shall be heard by
Special Bench or the Special Benches, as the case may be, to be constituted by
the Chief Justice, as deemed necessary for hearing cases under this section,
comprising of not less than two judges of the High Court and, in respect of the
reference, the provisions of section 98 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act V
of 1908), shall apply, so far as may be, notwithstanding anything contained in any
other law for the time being in force.
(5) The Special Bench shall decide a reference within six months from the
date of its filing.
(6) The High Court shall establish a case management system to ensure
that sufficient number of Special Benches are constituted, so as to ensure that a
reference filed under this section is decided within the stipulated six months.
(7) The High Court upon hearing a reference under this section shall
decide the question of law 7[ ] raised by the reference and pass judgment thereon
specifying the grounds on which such judgment is based and the Appellate
Tribunal's order 8[ ] 9[ ] shall stand modified accordingly.
Explanation added by the Finance Act, 2024.
Explanation omitted by the Finance Act, 2025. The omitted Explanation read as follows:
“Explanation.– For the removal of doubt it is clarified that reference against order of the Commissioner
(Appeals), communicated after the date of commencement of the Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 2024
(V of 2024), shall lie before the High Court notwithstanding the proceedings pending prior to the date
of commencement of the said Act.]”
Expression inserted by the Finance Act, 2024.
The expression “or, as the case may be, the Commissioner (Appeals)” omitted by the Finance Act,
2025.
The expression “or a mixed question of law and facts” omitted by the Finance Act, 2025.
The expression “or a mixed question of law and facts” omitted by the Finance Act, 2025.
The expression “or a mixed question of law and facts” omitted by the Finance Act, 2025.
Expression inserted by the Finance Act, 2024.
The expression “or, as the case may be, the Commissioner (Appeals)’s order” omitted by the
Finance Act, 2025.
(8) The High Court shall send a copy of the judgment under the seal of the
High Court to the Appellate Tribunal 1[ ].
(9) Notwithstanding that a reference has been made to the High Court, the
tax shall be payable in accordance with the order of the Appellate Tribunal 2[ ]:
Provided that the tax recovery shall not be made by the Commissioner for
thirty days from the date of communication of the order of the Appellate Tribunal
3[ ]:
Provided further that, if the amount of tax is reduced as a result of the
judgment in the reference by the High Court and some amount of tax is found to
be refundable, the High Court may, on application by the Commissioner within
thirty days of the receipt of the judgment of the High Court that he wants to prefer
petition for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, make an order authorizing the
Commissioner to postpone the refund until the disposal of the appeal by the
Supreme Court.
(10) On an application filed in a particular reference and after affording an
opportunity of being heard to the Commissioner, the High Court may stay recovery
of tax, subject to deposit with the assessing authority of not less than thirty percent
of the tax determined by the Appellate Tribunal 4[ ] 5[ ]. Where recovery of tax has
been stayed by the High Court by an order, such order shall cease to have effect
on the expiration of a period of six months following the day on which it was made
unless the reference is decided or such order is withdrawn by the High Court
earlier.
(11) Section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1908 (IX of 1908), shall apply to an
application made to the High Court under sub-section (1).
(12) An application under sub-section (1) 6[, by the aggrieved person other
than the Commissioner,] shall be accompanied by a fee of fifty thousand rupees.
The expression “or, as the case may be, the Commissioner (Appeals)” omitted by the Finance Act,
2025.
The expression “or, as the case may be, the Commissioner (Appeals)” omitted by the Finance Act,
2025.
The expression “or, as the case may be, the Commissioner (Appeals)” omitted by the Finance Act,
2025.
Expression inserted by the Finance Act, 2024.
The expression “or, as the case may be, the Commissioner (Appeals)” omitted by the Finance Act,
2025.
Expression inserted by the Finance Act, 2024.
(13) No application filed by the Commissioner under subsection (1) shall
be entertained unless it is accompanied by a written authorization by the relevant
Chief Commissioner.]
1[ ]
2[ ]
Section 134 omitted by the Finance Act, 2005. The omitted section 134 read as follows:
“134. Appeal to Supreme Court.- (1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judgment
of the High Court delivered on a reference made or question of law framed under section 133 in any
case which the High Court certifies to be a fit one for appeal to the Supreme Court.
(2) The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (V of 1908), relating to appeals to
the Supreme Court shall apply, so far as may be, in the case of an appeal under this section in like
manner as they apply in the case of an appeal from decrees of a High Court.
(3) Where the judgment of the High Court is varied or reversed in appeal under this section,
effect shall be given to the order of the Supreme Court in the manner provided in sub-section (12) of
section 133 in the case of a judgment of the High Court.
(4) The provisions of sub-sections (11), (12) and (13) of section 133 shall apply in the case
of an appeal to the Supreme Court made under this section as they apply to an appeal to the High
Court under section 133.”
2The section 134A substituted by the Finance Act 2020 dated 30th June, 2020, the substituted section
read as follows:134A. Alternative Dispute Resolution.— (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this
Ordinance, or the rules made thereunder, an aggrieved person in connection with any dispute pertaining to—
(a) the liability of tax against the aggrieved person, or admissibility of refunds, as the case may be;
(b) the extent of waiver of default surcharge and penalty; or
(c) any other specific relief required to resolve the dispute,
may apply to the Board for the appointment of a committee for the resolution of any hardship or dispute mentioned
in detail in the application, which is under litigation in any court of law or an Appellate Authority, except where criminal
proceedings have been initiated or where interpretation of question of law is involved having effect on other cases.
(2) The Board may, after examination of the application of an aggrieved person, appoint a committee,
within sixty days of receipt of such application in the Board, comprising,—
(i) an officer of Inland Revenue not below the rank of a Commissioner;
(ii) person to be nominated by the taxpayer from a panel notified by the Board comprising,—
(a) 2[ ] chartered accountants, 2[cost and management accountants] and 2[ ]
advocates having 2[minimum ten years] experience in the field of taxation; and
(b) reputable businessmen as nominated by Chambers of Commerce and industry:
Provided that the taxpayer shall not nominate a Chartered Accountant 2[or cost and
management accountant] or an advocate if the said Chartered Accountant 2[or cost and
management accountant] or the advocate is or has been an auditor or an authorized
representative of the taxpayer; and
(iii) a retired Judge not below the rank of District and Sessions Judge, to be nominated through
consensus by the members appointed under clauses (i) and (ii).
(3) The aggrieved person, or the Commissioner, or both, as the case may be, shall withdraw the appeal
pending before any court of law or an Appellate Authority, after constitution of the committee by the Board under sub-
section (2).
(4) The committee shall not commence the proceedings under sub-section (5) unless the order of
withdrawal by the court of law or the Appellate Authority is communicated to the Board:
Provided that if the order of withdrawal is not communicated within seventy five days of the
appointment of the committee, the said committee shall be dissolved and provisions of this section shall
not apply.
(5) The Committee appointed under sub-section (2) shall examine the issue and may, if it deems
necessary, conduct inquiry, seek expert opinion, direct any officer of the Inland Revenue or any other person to
conduct an audit and shall decide the dispute by majority, within one hundred and twenty days of its appointment:
Provided that in computing the aforesaid period of one hundred and twenty days, the period, if any,
for communicating the order of withdrawal under sub-section (4) shall be excluded.
(6) The recovery of tax payable by a taxpayer in connection with any dispute for which a Committee
has been appointed under sub- section (2) shall be deemed to have been stayed on withdrawal of appeal up to the
date of decision by the Committee.
(7) The decision of the committee under sub-section (5) shall be binding on the Commissioner and the
aggrieved person.
1[ ]
(8) If the Committee fails to decide within the period of one hundred and twenty days under sub-section
(5), the Board shall dissolve the committee by an order in writing and the matter shall be decided by the court of law
or the Appellate Authority which issued the order of withdrawal under sub-section (4) and the appeal shall be treated
to be pending before such court of law or the Appellate Authority as if the appeal had never been withdrawn.
(9) The Board shall communicate the order of dissolution to the court of law or the Appellate Authority
and the Commissioner.
(10) The aggrieved person, on receipt of the order of dissolution, shall communicate it to the court of law
or the Appellate Authority, which shall decide the appeal within six months of the communication of said order.
(11) The aggrieved person may make the payment of income tax and other taxes as decided by the
committee under sub-section (5) and all decisions, orders and judgments made or passed shall stand modified to that
extent.
(12) The Board may prescribe the amount to be paid as remuneration for the services of the members
of the Committee, other than the member appointed under clause (i) of sub-section (2).
(13) The Board may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of
this section.
Section 134A substituted by the Finance Act, 2023. The Substituted section read as follows:
“134A. Alternative Dispute Resolution. — (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of the Ordinance,
or the rules made thereunder, an aggrieved person in connection with any dispute pertaining to—
(a) the liability of tax of one hundred million and above against the aggrieved person or
admissibility of refund, as the case may be;
(b) the extent of waiver of default surcharge and penalty; or
(c) any other specific relief required to resolve the dispute; may apply to the Board for the
appointment of a committee for the resolution of any hardship or dispute mentioned in
detail in the application, which is under litigation in any court of law or an Appellate
Authority, except where criminal proceedings have been initiated.
(2) The application for dispute resolution shall be accompanied by an initial proposition for
resolution of the dispute, including an offer of tax payment, from which, the applicant would not be
entitled to retract.
(3) The Board may, after examination of the application of an aggrieved person, appoint a
committee, within forty five days of receipt of such application in the Board, comprising,—
(i) Chief Commissioner Inland Revenue having jurisdiction over the case;
(ii) person to be nominated by the taxpayer from a panel notified by the Board comprising
–
(a) chartered accountants, cost and management accountants and advocates having
a minimum of ten years’ experience in the field of taxation;
(b) officers of the Inland Revenue Service who have retired in BS 21 or above; or
(c) reputable businessmen as nominated by Chambers of Commerce and Industry:
Provided that the taxpayer shall not nominate a Chartered Accountant or an
advocate if the said Chartered Accountant or the advocate is or has been an
auditor or an authorized representative of the taxpayer; and
(d) person to be nominated through consensus by the members appointed under (i)
and (ii) above, from the panel as notified by the Board in clause (ii) above:
Provided that where the member under this clause cannot be appointed
through consensus, the Board may nominate a member proposed by the taxpayer
eligible to be nominated as per clause (ii).
(4) The aggrieved person, or the Commissioner, or both, as the case may be, shall
withdraw the appeal pending before any court of law or an Appellate Authority, after constitution of
the committee by the Board under sub-section (3), in respect of dispute as mentioned in sub-section
(1).
(5) The committee shall not commence the proceedings under sub-section (6) unless the
order of withdrawal by the court of law or the Appellate Authority is communicated to the Board:
Provided that if the order of withdrawal is not communicated within seventy five days of
the appointment of the committee, the said committee shall be dissolved and provisions of this
section shall not apply.
1[134A. Alternative Dispute Resolution.—(1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in this Ordinance, or the rules made thereunder, an aggrieved person in
connection with any dispute pertaining to —
(6) The Committee appointed under sub-section (3) shall examine the issue and may, if it
deems necessary, conduct inquiry, seek expert opinion, direct any officer of the Inland Revenue or
any other person to conduct an audit and shall decide the dispute by majority, within one hundred and
twenty days of its appointment:
Provided that in computing the aforesaid period of one hundred and twenty days, the period, if
any, for communicating the order of withdrawal under sub-section (5) shall be excluded.
(7) The decision by the Committee under sub-section (6) shall not be cited or taken as a
precedent in any other case or in the same case for a different tax year.
(8) The recovery of tax payable by a taxpayer in connection with any dispute for which a
Committee has been appointed under sub-section (3) shall be deemed to have been stayed on
withdrawal of appeal up to the date of decision by the Committee or the dissolution of the Committee
whichever is earlier.
(9) The decision of the committee under sub-section (6) shall be binding on the
Commissioner and the aggrieved person.
(10) If the Committee fails to decide within the period of one hundred and twenty days under
sub-section (6), the Board shall dissolve the committee by an order in writing and the matter shall be
decided by the court of law or the Appellate Authority which issued the order of withdrawal under sub-
section (5) and the appeal shall be treated to be pending before such court of law or the Appellate
Authority as if the appeal had never been withdrawn.
(11) The Board shall communicate the order of dissolution to the court of law or the Appellate
Authority and the Commissioner.
(12) The aggrieved person, on receipt of the order of dissolution, shall communicate it to the
court of law or the Appellate Authority, which shall decide the appeal within six months of the
communication of said order.
(13) The aggrieved person may make the payment of income tax and other taxes as decided
by the committee under sub-section (6) and all decisions, orders and judgments made or passed shall
stand modified to that extent.
(14) The Board may prescribe the amount to be paid as remuneration for the services of the
members of the Committee, other than the member appointed under clause (i) of sub-section (3).
(15) The Board may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the
purposes of this section.]
1 Section 134A substituted through Income Tax (Amendment) Act, 2026 (Act No. IX of 2026). The
substituted section read as under:
“134A. Alternative Dispute Resolution. – 1[(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this
Ordinance, or the rules made thereunder, an aggrieved person in connection with any dispute
pertaining to —
(a) the liability of tax of fifty million rupees or above against the aggrieved person or admissibility of refund,
as the case may be;
(b) the extent of waiver of default surcharge and penalty; or
(c) any other specific relief required to resolve the dispute,
may apply, except where criminal proceedings have been initiated, to the Board for the appointment
of a committee for the resolution of any hardship or dispute mentioned in detail in the application:
Provided that where the aggrieved person is a state-owned enterprise (SOE), the limit of
tax liability of fifty million rupees or above mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall not apply
and it shall be mandatory for such aggrieved SOE to apply to the Board for the appointment of a
committee for the resolution of any dispute under this section:
Provided further that no suit, prosecution, or other legal proceedings shall lie against the
SOE or the committee in relation to the dispute resolved under this section.
Explanation.—State-owned enterprise shall have the same meaning as assigned thereto
in the State-Owned Enterprises (Governance and Operations) Act, 2023 (VII of 2023).
(2) The application for dispute resolution under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by
—
(a) an initial proposition for resolution of the dispute, including an offer of tax payment; and
(b) an undertaking that the applicant shall accept the decision of the Committee which shall be
binding on him in all respects and shall on receipt of the decision immediately withdraw any
and all pending litigation or cases of any kind in respect of the dispute, mentioning details
thereof:
Provided that if the applicant is an SOE, it shall withdraw any and all such pending litigation
and cases immediately and mention the details thereof in the undertaking:
Provided further that the SOE may file an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal or a reference to
the High Court or a petition for leave to appeal the Supreme Court, as the case may be, where
subsection (11) is applicable.]
(3) The Board may, after examination of the application of an aggrieved person, appoint a
committee, within fifteen days of receipt of such application in the Board, comprising, –
(i) a retired judge not below the rank of a judge of a High Court, who shall also be the
Chairperson of the Committee, to be nominated by the Board from a panel notified by
the Law and Justice Division for such purpose;
(ii) the Chief Commissioner Inland Revenue having jurisdiction over the case; and
(iii) a person to be nominated by the taxpayer from a panel notified by the Board comprising
–
(a) chartered accountants, cost and management accountants and advocates
having a minimum of ten years’ experience in the field of taxation;
(b) officers of the Inland Revenue Service who stood retired in BS 21 or above; or
(c) reputable businessmen as nominated by the Chambers of Commerce and
Industry:
Provided that the taxpayer shall not nominate a chartered accountant or
an advocate if the said chartered accountant or the advocate is or has been an
auditor or an authorized representative of the taxpayer.
(4) The Board shall communicate the order of appointment of Committee to the aggrieved
person, court of law or the appellate authority where the dispute is pending and to the concerned
Commissioner.
(5) The Committee appointed under sub-section (3) shall examine the issue and may, if it
deems necessary, conduct inquiry, seek expert opinion, direct any officer of the Inland Revenue or any
other person to conduct an audit and shall decide the dispute by majority, within forty-five days of its
appointment extendable by another fifteen days for the reasons to be recorded in writing.
(6) The decision by the Committee under sub-section (5) shall not be cited or taken as a
precedent in any other case or in the same case for a different tax year.
(7) The recovery of tax payable by a taxpayer in connection with any dispute for which a
Committee has been appointed under sub-section (3) shall be deemed to have been stayed on the
constitution of Committee till the final decision or dissolution of the Committee, whichever is earlier.
(8) The decision of the Committee under sub-section (5) shall be binding on the
Commissioner when the aggrieved person, being satisfied with the decision, has withdrawn the appeal
pending before the court of law or any appellate authority in respect of dispute as mentioned in sub-
section (1) and has communicated the order of withdrawal to the Commissioner:
Provided that if the order of withdrawal is not communicated to the Commissioner within sixty
days of the service of decision of the Committee upon the aggrieved person, the decision of the
Committee shall not be binding on the Commissioner.
(9) Subject to sub-section (10), the Commissioner shall also withdraw the appeal, if any,
pending before any court of law or an appellate authority in respect of dispute as mentioned in sub-
section (1) within thirty days of the communication of the order of withdrawal by the aggrieved person
to the Commissioner.
(10) The aggrieved person shall make the payment of income tax and other taxes and within
such time as decided by the Committee under sub-section (5) and all decisions and orders made or
passed shall stand modified to that extent.
(11) 1[Subject to sub-section (11A), if] the Committee fails to decide within the period of sixty
days under sub-section (5), the Board shall dissolve the Committee by an order in writing and the matter
shall be decided by the court of law or the appellate authority where the dispute is pending under
litigation.
(a) the liability of tax of fifty million rupees or above or admissibility of refund, as
the case may be;
(b) the extent of waiver of default surcharge and penalty; or
(c) other specific relief required to resolve the dispute, may apply, except where
criminal proceedings have been initiated, to the Board for the appointment of
an alternative dispute resolution committee “Committee” under this section
for the resolution of any dispute:
Provided that where the aggrieved person is a state-owned enterprise
“SOE”, the limit of tax liability mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall
not apply and it shall be mandatory for such aggrieved SOE to apply to the
Board for the appointment of a Committee for the resolution of any dispute
under this section:
Provided further that no suit, prosecution, or other legal proceedings
shall lie against the SOE or the Committee in relation to the dispute resolved
under this section.
Explanation.—State-owned enterprise shall have the same meaning
as assigned thereto in the State-Owned Enterprises (Governance and
Operations) Act, 2023 (VII of 2023).
(2) The application for alternative dispute resolution under sub-section
(1) shall be accompanied by –
(a) initial proposition for resolution of the dispute; and
(b) an undertaking that if the applicant accepts the decision of the
Committee, it shall be binding on him in all respects and shall on
receipt of the decision within fifteen days withdraw any and all pending
cases of any kind in respect of the dispute, mentioning details thereof:
1[(11A) In the case of a state-owned enterprise, if the Committee fails to decide within a period
of sixty days, the Board shall reappoint a Committee under sub-section (3), that shall decide the dispute
in accordance with sub-section (5) of this section.
(11B) Sub-section (11) shall apply, in case of a state-owned enterprise, if the reappointed
Committee fails to decide the matter within a further period of sixty days.]
(12) The Board shall communicate the order of dissolution to the aggrieved person, court of
law or the appellate authority and to the Commissioner.
1[(13) On receipt of the order of dissolution, the court of law or the Appellate Tribunal shall
decide the appeal within ninety days of the communication of the said order.]
(14) The Board may prescribe the amount to be paid as remuneration for the services of the
members of the Committee, other than the member appointed under clause (ii) of sub-section (3).
(15) The Board may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the
purposes of this section.]
Provided that in case of SOE which is, directly or indirectly,
wholly owned by the Federal Government, the decision of the
Committee shall be final and binding on the Commissioner and the
SOE.
(3) The Chairman of the Board, after examination of the application of an
aggrieved person, appoint a committee, within fifteen days of receipt of such
application by the Board, comprising, –
(a) a retired judge of a High Court, the Federal Constitutional Court or the
Supreme Court having adequate experience in dealing with tax or
commercial matters, who shall also be the Chairperson of the
Committee, to be nominated by the Chairman of the Board from a
panel of three names proposed by the nominee of the taxpayer under
clause (c) of this sub-section. In case the Chairman disagrees with the
names proposed by the persons nominated by the taxpayer in terms
of clause (c), the Chairman of the Board shall require the nominees
appointed under clause (b) and (c) to propose one name each of a
retired judge of a High Court, the Federal Constitutional Court or the
Supreme Court having adequate experience in dealing with tax or
commercial matters, whereupon the Chairman shall forward such
names to the Federal Minister for Law and Justice for nomination of
one of such person as Chairperson of the Committee;
(b) an officer of the Inland Revenue not below BS 21, other than, the Chief
Commissioner Inland Revenue having jurisdiction over the case; and
(c) a person to be nominated by the taxpayer from amongst –
(i) accountants within the meaning of the Chartered Accountants
Ordinance, 1961 (X of 1961); or
(ii) cost and management accountants within the meaning of the
Cost and Management Accountant Act, 1966 (Act No. XIV of
1966); or
(iii) advocates having a minimum of fifteen years’ experience in the
field of taxation or commercial matters; or
(iv) officers of the Inland Revenue who retired in BS 21 or above; or
(v) businessmen from a list notified by the Board as recommended
by the Federation of Pakistan Chamber of Commerce and
Industry:
Provided that the taxpayer shall not nominate a chartered
accountant or an advocate if the said chartered accountant or
the advocate is or has been an auditor or an authorized
representative of the taxpayer.
(4) The Chairman of the Board shall communicate the order of
appointment of Committee to the aggrieved person, court of law or Appellate
Tribunal or tax authority where dispute is pending and to the Commissioner
concerned.
(5) The Committee appointed under sub-section (3) shall examine the
issue and may, if it deems necessary, conduct inquiry, seek expert opinion, direct
any officer of the Inland Revenue or any other person to conduct an audit and shall
decide the dispute by majority, within ninety days of its appointment.
(6) The decision by the Committee under sub-section (5) shall not be cited
or taken as a precedent in any other case or in the same case for a different tax
year.
(7) The recovery of tax payable by a taxpayer in connection with any
dispute for which a Committee has been appointed under sub-section (3) shall be
deemed to have been stayed on the constitution of Committee till the final decision
or dissolution of the Committee, whichever is earlier.
(8) The decision of the Committee under sub-section (5) shall be binding
on the Commissioner when the aggrieved person, being satisfied with the decision,
has withdrawn the appeal pending before the court of law or Appellate Tribunal or
tax authority in respect of dispute as mentioned in sub-section (1) and has
communicated the order of withdrawal to the Commissioner:
Provided that if the order of withdrawal is not communicated to the
Commissioner within sixty days of the service of decision of the Committee
upon the aggrieved person, the decision of the Committee shall not be
binding on the Commissioner.
(9) Subject to sub-section (10), the Commissioner shall also withdraw the
appeal, if any, pending before any court of law or Appellate Tribunal or tax authority
in respect of dispute as mentioned in sub-section (1) within thirty days of the
communication of the order of withdrawal by the aggrieved person to the
Commissioner.
(10) The aggrieved person shall make the payment of income tax and other
taxes and within such time as decided by the Committee under sub-section (5)
and all decisions and orders made or passed shall stand modified to that
extent.
(11) If the Committee fails to decide within the period of ninety days under
sub-section (5), the Chairman of the Board shall dissolve the Committee by an
order in writing and the matter shall be decided by the court of law or Appellate
Tribunal or tax authority, as the case may be:
Provided that in case of SOE, except an SOE, which is, directly or
indirectly, wholly owned by the Federal Government, either party may prefer
an appeal to the Federal Constitutional Court or the Supreme Court, as the
case may be, within a period of sixty days against a decision of the
Committee or where no decision is made, upon receiving order of dissolution
of the Committee.
(12) All petitions filed by the SOEs, directly or indirectly, wholly owned by
the Federal Government, against the decision of the Committee made prior to
commencement of the Income Tax (Amendment) Act, 2026 (Act No. IX of 2026)
and pending before the Federal Constitutional Court, the Supreme Court or a High
Court shall, upon commencement of the Income Tax (Amendment) Act, 2026
(Act No. IX of 2026), abate.
(13) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (12), petitions filed
by SOEs, which are not wholly owned by the Federal Government, against the
decision of the Committee made prior to commencement of the Income Tax
(Amendment) Act, 2026 (Act No. IX of 2026) and pending before a High Court,
shall upon commencement of the Income Tax (Amendment) Act, 2026 (Act No. IX
of 2026) abate:
Provided that such SOEs may prefer an appeal to the Federal
Constitutional Court or the Supreme Court, as the case may be, against the
decision of the Committee, within a period of sixty days from commencement of
the Income Tax (Amendment) Act, 2026 (Act No. IX of 2026).
(14) The Chairman of the Board shall communicate the order of dissolution
of the Committee to the aggrieved person, the Commissioner concerned and the
court of law or Appellate Tribunal or tax authority, where the case was previously
pending.
(15) On receipt of the order of dissolution, the court of law or Appellate
Tribunal or tax authority, as the case may be, shall decide the case within ninety
days of the communication of the said order.
(16) The Board may, from time to time, prescribe the amount to be paid as
remuneration to the Chairperson of the Committee, which remuneration shall be
paid by the Board and the taxpayer equally within a period of fifteen days from the
constitution of the Committee under sub-section (3).
(17) The taxpayer shall be responsible for remuneration of a nominee
under clause (c) of sub-section (3).
(18) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section: -
(a) The Federal Constitutional Court, the Supreme Court or a High
Court, on its own motion or on the application of either party, may
refer the dispute pending before it to the Board for resolution by
the Committee to be appointed under sub- section (3):
Provided that where both parties agree to refer the
dispute for resolution by the Committee, the court of law or
Appellate Tribunal or tax authority seized of the dispute shall
record the consent of both the parties and shall refer the dispute
to the Board for appointment of the Committee under sub-section
(3):
Provided further that all disputes of SOEs pending
before any court of law or Appellate Tribunal or tax authority shall
stand transferred to the Board for resolution by the Committee to
be appointed under sub-section (3) upon commencement of the
Income Tax (Amendment) Act, 2026 (Act No. IX of 2026); and
(b) whenever any dispute is referred or transferred under clause
(a) for resolution by the Committee, the Board shall within fifteen
days from the date of such order or transfer, appoint the
Committee under sub-section (3).
(19) The provisions of the Income Tax (Amendment) Act, 2026 (Act No. IX
of 2026) shall be subject to the provisions of section 6 of the General Clauses Act,
1897 (X of 1897) provided that the applicant including a SOE may make a fresh
application for reconstitution of the Committee in accordance with the provisions of
the Income Tax (Amendment) Act, 2026 (Act No. IX of 2026), if the Committee has
not rendered its decision prior to its enactment.
(20) The Board may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this section.]
1[ ]
136. Burden of proof.— In any appeal 2[by a taxpayer] under this Part, the
burden shall be on the taxpayer to prove, on the balance of probabilities —
(a) in the case of an assessment order, the extent to which the order does
not correctly reflect the taxpayer’s tax liability for the tax year; or
(b) in the case of any other decision, that the decision is erroneous.
Section 135 omitted by the Finance Act, 2002. The omitted section 135 read as follows:
“135. Revision by the Commissioner.- (1) The Commissioner may either of the Commissioner’s own motion or
on application in writing by a person for revision, call for the record of any proceeding under this Ordinance in which
an order has been passed by any taxation officer other than the Commissioner (Appeals).
(2) Subject to sub-section (3), where, after making such inquiry as is necessary, Commissioner
considers that the order requires revision, the Commissioner may make such revision to the order as the
Commissioner thinks fit.
(3) An order under sub-section (2) shall not be prejudicial to the person to whom the order relates.
(4) The Commissioner shall not revise any order under sub-section (2) if –
(a) where an appeal against the order lies to the Commissioner (Appeals) or to the Appellate
Tribunal, the time within which such appeal may be made has not expired, or the person
has not waived their right of appeal;
(b) the order is pending on appeal before the Commissioner (Appeals) or has been made the
subject of an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal; or
(c) in the case of an application made by a person, the application has not been made within
ninety days of the date on which such order was served on the person, unless the
Commissioner is satisfied that the person was prevented by sufficient cause from making
the application within the time allowed.
(5) No application for revision of an assessment order may be made under sub-section (1) unless the amount
of tax due under the assessment that is not in dispute has been paid by the taxpayer.
(6) An application under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by –
(a) in relation to an assessment order, a fee of the lesser of two thousand five hundred rupees
or ten per cent of the tax assessed; or
(b) in any other case –
(i) where the applicant is a company, a fee of two thousand rupees; or
(ii) where the applicant is not a company, a fee of five hundred rupees.
(7) An order by the Commissioner declining to interfere shall not be treated as an order prejudicial to the
applicant.”
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
