PART II
TAXATION OF FOREIGN-SOURCE INCOME OF RESIDENTS
102. Foreign source salary of resident individuals.— (1) Any foreign-source
salary received by a resident individual shall be exempt from tax if the individual
has paid foreign income tax in respect of the salary.
(2) A resident individual shall be treated as having paid foreign income
tax in respect of foreign-source salary if tax has been withheld from the salary by
the individual’s employer and paid to the revenue authority of the foreign country
in which the employment was exercised.
103. Foreign tax credit.— (1) Where a resident taxpayer derives foreign source
income chargeable to tax under this Ordinance in respect of which the taxpayer
has paid foreign income tax, the taxpayer shall be allowed a tax credit of an amount
equal to the lesser of –
(a) the foreign income tax paid; or
(b) the Pakistan tax payable in respect of the income.
(2) For the purposes of clause (b) of sub-section (1), the Pakistan tax
payable in respect of foreign source income derived by a taxpayer in a tax year
shall be computed by applying the average rate of Pakistan income tax applicable
to the taxpayer for the year against the taxpayer’s net foreign-source income for
the year.
(3) Where, in a tax year, a taxpayer has foreign income under more than
one head of income, this section shall apply separately to each head of income.
(4) For the purposes of sub-section (3), income derived by a taxpayer
from carrying on a speculation business shall be treated as a separate head of
income.
(5) The tax credit allowed under this section shall be applied in
accordance with sub-section (3) of section 4.
(6) Any tax credit or part of a tax credit allowed under this section for a
tax year that is not credited under sub-section (3) of section 4 shall not be refunded,
carried back to the preceding tax year, or carried forward to the following tax year.
(7) A credit shall be allowed under this section only if the foreign income
tax is paid within two years after the end of the tax year in which the foreign income
to which the tax relates was derived by the resident taxpayer.
(8) In this section,—
“average rate of Pakistan income tax” in relation to a taxpayer for a
tax year, means the percentage that the Pakistani income tax (before
allowance of the tax credit under this section) is of the taxable income
of the taxpayer for the year;
“foreign income tax” includes a foreign withholding tax; and
“net foreign-source income” in relation to a taxpayer for a tax year,
means the total foreign-source income of the taxpayer charged to tax
in the year, as reduced by any deductions allowed to the taxpayer
under this Ordinance for the year that –
(a) relate exclusively to the derivation of the foreign-source income;
and
(b) are reasonably related to the derivation of foreign-source
income in accordance with sub-section (1) of section 67 and any
rules made for the purposes of that section.
104. Foreign losses.— (1) Deductible expenditures incurred by a person in
deriving foreign-source income chargeable to tax under a head of income shall be
deductible only against that income.
(2) If the total deductible expenditures referred to in sub-section (1)
exceed the total foreign source income for a tax year chargeable to tax under a
head of income (hereinafter referred to as a “foreign loss”), the foreign loss shall
be carried forward to the following tax year and set off against the foreign source
income chargeable to tax under that head in that year, and so on, but no foreign
loss shall be carried forward to more than six tax years immediately succeeding
the tax year for which the loss was computed.
(3) Where a taxpayer has a foreign loss carried forward for more than one
tax year, the loss for the earliest year shall be set off first.
(4) Section 67 shall apply for the purposes of this section on the basis
that —
(a) income from carrying on a speculation business is a separate
head of income; and
(b) foreign source income chargeable under a head of income
(including the head specified in clause (a)) shall be a separate
head of income.
