PART I
GENERAL
66. Income of joint owners.—(1) For the purposes of this Ordinance and subject
to sub-section (2), where any property is owned by two or more persons and their
respective shares are definite and ascertainable –
(a) the persons shall not be assessed as an association of persons
in respect of the property; and
(b) the share of each person in the income from the property for a
tax year shall be taken into account in the computation of the
person’s taxable income for that year.
(2) This section shall not apply in computing income chargeable under
the head “Income from Business”.
67. Apportionment of deductions.— (1) Subject to this Ordinance, where an
expenditure1[“expenditures, deductions and allowances”] relates to –
(a) the derivation of more than one head of income; or
2[(ab) derivation of income comprising of taxable income and any
class of income to which sub-sections (4) and (5) of section 4
apply, or;]
(b) the derivation of income chargeable to tax under a head of
income and to some other purpose,
the expenditure 3[“expenditures, deductions and allowances”] shall be apportioned
on any reasonable basis taking account of the relative nature and size of the
activities to which the amount relates.
(2) The 4[Board] may make rules under section 5[237] for the purposes of
apportioning deductions 6[expenditures and allowances].
68. Fair market value.— (1) For the purposes of this Ordinance, the fair market
value of any property 7[or rent], asset, service, benefit or perquisite at a particular
Substituted by the Finance Act, 2016.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2002.
Substituted by the Finance Act, 2016.
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
The figure “232” substituted by the Finance Act, 2002.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2016.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
time shall be the price which the property 1[or rent], asset, service, benefit or
perquisite would ordinarily fetch on sale or supply in the open market at that time.
(2) The fair market value of any property 2[or rent], asset, service, benefit
or perquisite shall be determined without regard to any restriction on transfer or to
the fact that it is not otherwise convertible to cash.
3[(3) Where the price 4[other than the price of immoveable property]
referred to in sub-section (1) is not ordinarily ascertainable, such price may be
determined by the Commissioner.]
5[(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (3), 6[the
Board may, from time to time, by notification in the official Gazette, determine the
fair market value of immovable property of the area or areas as may be specified
in the notification] .]
7[(5) Where the fair market value of any immovable property of an area or
areas has not been determined by the Board in the notification referred to in sub-
section (4), the fair market value of such immovable property shall be deemed to
be the value fixed by the District Officer (Revenue) or provincial or any other
authority authorized in this behalf for the purposes of stamp duty.]
8[(6) In respect of immovable property—
(i) component A of the formula in sub-section (2) of section 37;
(ii) “consideration received" as mentioned in Division X of Part IV of First
Schedule;
(iii) “value of immovable property" as mentioned in Divisions XVIII of Part
IV of the First Schedule; and
(iv) valuation for the purposes of section 111,shall not be less than the fair
market value as determined under sub-section (4) or (5).
Explanation.—(1) For the removal of doubt, it is clarified that the fair
market value as determined under sub-section (4) or(5) shall be for carrying
out the purposes of this Ordinance only.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Added by the Finance Act, 2003.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2016.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2016.
Substituted by the Income Tax (Fourth Amendment) Act, 2016 dated 02.12.2016. The substituted
expression read as follows:
“the fair market value of immovable property shall be determined on the basis of valuation made by a
panel of approved values of the State Bank of Pakistan”.
Added by the Income Tax (Fourth Amendment) Act, 2016 dated 02.12.2016.
Added by the Income Tax (Fourth Amendment) Act, 2016 dated 02.12.2016.
(2) It is further clarified that for the purposes of clauses (i) to (iv) of
this sub-section if the fair market value determined under sub-section (4) or
(5) is different than the auction price the applicable price shall be the higher
of the two.]
69. Receipt of income.— For the purposes of this Ordinance, a person shall be
treated as having received an amount, benefit, or perquisite if it is —
(a) actually received by the person;
(b) applied on behalf of the person, at the instruction of the person
or under any law; or
(c) made available to the person.
70. Recouped expenditure.— Where a person has been allowed a deduction
for any expenditure or loss incurred in a tax year in the computation of the person’s
income chargeable to tax under a head of income and, subsequently, the person
has received, in cash or in kind, any amount in respect of such expenditure or loss,
the amount so received shall be included in the income chargeable under that head
for the tax year in which it is received.
71. Currency conversion.— (1) Every amount taken into account under this
Ordinance shall be in Rupees.
(2) Where an amount is in a currency other than rupees, the amount shall
be converted to the Rupee at the State Bank of Pakistan 1[ ] rate applying between
the foreign currency and the Rupee on the date the amount is taken into account
for the purposes of this Ordinance.
72. Cessation of source of income.— Where —
(a) any income is derived by a person in a tax year from any business,
activity, investment or other source that has ceased either before the
commencement of the year or during the year; and
(b) if the income had been derived before the business, activity,
investment or other source ceased it would have been chargeable to
tax under this Ordinance,
this Ordinance shall apply to the income on the basis that the business, activity,
investment or other source had not ceased at the time the income was derived.
73. Rules to prevent double derivation and double deductions.— (1) For the
purposes of this Ordinance, where –
The word “mid-exchange” omitted by the Finance Act, 2003.
(a) any amount is chargeable to tax under this Ordinance on the basis that
it is receivable, the amount shall not be chargeable again on the basis
that it is received; or
(b) any amount is chargeable to tax under this Ordinance on the basis that
it is received, the amount shall not be chargeable again on the basis
that it is receivable.
(2) For the purposes of this Ordinance, where —
(a) any expenditure is deductible under this Ordinance on the basis
that it is payable, the expenditure shall not be deductible again
on the basis that it is paid; or
(b) any expenditure is deductible under this Ordinance on the basis
that it is paid, the expenditure shall not be deductible again on
the basis that it is payable.
