Division I
Persons
80. Person. — (1) The following shall be treated as persons for the purposes of
this Ordinance, namely: —
(a) An individual;
(b) a company or association of persons incorporated, formed, organised
or established in Pakistan or elsewhere;
(c) the Federal Government, a foreign government, a political sub-Division
of a foreign government, or public international organisation.
(2) For the purposes of this Ordinance —
(a) “association of persons” includes a firm, a Hindu undivided
family, any artificial juridical person and anybody of persons
formed under a foreign law, but does not include a company;
(b) “company” means —
(i) a company as defined in the 1[Companies Act, 2017 (XIX
of 2017)];
(ii) a body corporate formed by or under any law in force in
Pakistan;
(iii) a modaraba;
(iv) a body incorporated by or under the law of a country
outside Pakistan relating to incorporation of companies;
2[(v) a co-operative society, a finance society or any other
society;]
The expression “Companies Ordinance, 1984 (XLVII of 1984)” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
Clause (v) substituted by the Finance Act, 2013. The substituted Clause (v) read as follows:-
“(v) a trust, a co-operative society or a finance society or any other society
established or constituted by or under any law for the time being in force;”
1[(va) a non-profit organization;]
2[(vb) a trust, an entity or a body of persons established or
constituted by or under any law for the time being in force;]
(vi) a foreign association, whether incorporated or not, which
the 3[Board] has, by general or special order, declared to
be a company for the purposes of this Ordinance;
(vii) a Provincial Government; 4[ ]
(viii) a 5[Local Government] in Pakistan; 6[or]
7[(ix) a Small Company as defined in section 2;]
(c) “firm” means the relation between persons who have agreed to
share the profits of a business carried on by all or any of them
acting for all;
(d) “trust” means an obligation annexed to the ownership of
property and arising out of the confidence reposed in and
accepted by the owner, or declared and accepted by the owner
for the benefit of another, or of another and the owner, and
includes a unit trust; and
(e) “unit trust” means any trust under which beneficial interests are
divided into units such that the entitlements of the beneficiaries
to income or capital are determined by the number of units held.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2013.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2013.
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
The word “or” omitted by the Finance Act, 2005.
The words “local authority” substituted by the Finance Act, 2008.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2005.
Added by the Finance Act, 2005.
