PART XI
OFFENCES AND PROSECUTIONS
191. Prosecution for non-compliance with certain statutory obligations. —
(1) Any person who, without reasonable excuse, fails to —
the person shall be liable for a penalty equal to –
(i) where the statement or omission was made knowingly or recklessly, two
hundred per cent of the tax shortfall; or
(ii) in any other case (other than where sub-section (2) applies), twenty-five
per cent of the tax shortfall.
(2) In the case of an assessment order under section 120, no penalty shall be imposed
under sub-section (1) to the extent to which the tax shortfall arose as a result of the taxpayer taking
a reasonably arguable position on the application of this Ordinance to the taxpayer’s position.
(3) A reference in this section to a statement made to an income tax authority is a reference
to a statement made in writing or orally to that authority acting in the performance of the authority’s
duties under this Ordinance, and shall include a statement made -
(a) in an application, certificate, declaration, notification, return, objection or other
document made, prepared, given, filed or furnished under this Ordinance;
(b) in information required to be furnished under this Ordinance;
(c) in a document furnished to an income tax authority otherwise than pursuant to
this Ordinance;
(d) in answer to a question asked of a person by an income tax authority; or
(e) to another person with the knowledge or reasonable expectation that the statement
would be conveyed to an income tax authority.”
Section 188 omitted by the Finance Act, 2010. The omitted section 188 read as follows:
“188. Penalty for failure to give notice.- (1) Where a person fails to give notice of the
discontinuance of the person’s business as required under section 117, the Commissioner may
impose a penalty on the person not exceeding the amount of tax payable by the person for the tax
year in which the business was discontinued.
(2) Where a person fails to give notice of the person’s appointment as liquidator as required
under section 141, the Commissioner may impose a penalty on the person not exceeding ten
thousand rupees.”
Section 189 omitted by the Finance Act, 2010. The omitted section 189 read as follows:
“189. Penalty for obstruction.- Where any person obstructs the Commissioner or a taxation officer
in discharge of the Commissioner or officer’s functions under this Ordinance, the Commissioner may
impose a penalty on the person not exceeding ten thousand rupees.”
Section 190 omitted by the Finance Act, 2010. The omitted section 190 read as follows:
“190. Imposition of penalty.- (1) No penalty may be imposed under this Part on any person unless
the person is given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(2) Subject to sub-section (3), the imposition of a penalty under this Part shall be without
prejudice to any other liability incurred by the person under this Ordinance.
(3) The imposition of a penalty in relation to an act or omission shall be an alternative to
prosecution under Part XI of this Chapter.
(4) If a penalty has been paid under this Part and the Commissioner institutes a prosecution
proceeding under Part XI of this Chapter in respect of the same act or omission, the Commissioner
shall refund the amount of penalty paid, and the penalty shall not be payable unless the prosecution
is withdrawn.
(5) A penalty under sections 182, 183, 185, 186 and 187 shall be imposed by the Commissioner.
(6) The provisions of Parts III and IV of this Chapter shall apply to an assessment of penalty
as if it were an assessment of tax.”
1[(a) comply with a notice under sub-section (3)2[and sub-section (4)] of
section 114 3[, sub-section (3) of section 117] or sub-section (1) of section
116;]
(b) pay advance tax as required under section 147;
(c) comply with the obligation under Part V of this Chapter4[or chapter XII]
to collect or deduct tax and pay the tax to the Commissioner;
5[(ca) furnish particulars or complete or accurate particulars of persons
mentioned in sub-section (1) of section 165;]
(d) comply with a notice served under section 140 or 176;
(e) comply with the requirements of 6[sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of]
section 141; 7[ ]
(f ) provide reasonable facilities and assistance as required under sub-
section (3) of section 175 8[; 9[ ]
(g) declare business bank account(s) in the registration form or updated
registration form or return of income or wealth statement] 10[;
(h) integrate his business with Board’s computerized system; or
(i) generate tax invoice verifiable by the Board’s system;”;
shall commit an offence punishable on conviction with a fine or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding one year, or both.
(2) If a person convicted of an offence under clause (a) of sub-section (1)
fails, without reasonable excuse, to furnish the return of income or wealth
statement to which the offence relates within the period specified by the Court, the
person shall commit a further offence punishable on conviction with a fine 11[not
exceeding fifty thousand rupees] or imprisonment for a term not exceeding two
years, or both.
Substituted by the Finance Act, 2003. The substituted clause (a) read as follows:
“(a) furnish a return of income as required under section 114 or a wealth statement as required
under section 116;”
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2017
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2024.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2017
New clause (ca) inserted through Finance Act, 2019.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
The word “or” omitted by the Finance Act, 2021.
Comma substituted, the word “and” inserted and clause (g) added by the Finance Act, 2021.
The word “and” omitted by the Finance Act, 2022.
Comma substituted and clauses (h) and (i) added by the Finance Act, 2022.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2009.
1[191A. Prosecution for failure to furnish information in return of income. –
Any company including a banking company and an association of persons who –
(a) fails to fully state all the relevant particulars or information as specified in the
form of return, including a declaration of the records kept by the taxpayer;
(b) furnishes blank or incomplete particulars or information as specified in the
return of income; or
(c) attaches blank or incomplete annexures, statements or documents where
such annexures, statements or records were required to be filed, shall
commit an offence punishable on conviction with a fine or imprisonment for
a term not exceeding one year or both.]
191B. Prosecution for non-registration. – Any person specified in section 99B
who is required to apply for registration but fails to do so shall commit an offence
punishable on conviction with imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months
or fine or both.]
192. Prosecution for false statement in verification. — Any person who
makes a statement in any verification in any return or other document furnished
under this Ordinance which is false and which the person knows or believes to be
false, or does not believe to be true, the person shall commit an offence punishable
on conviction with a fine 2[upto hundred thousand rupees] or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding three years, or both.
3[192A. Prosecution for concealment of income.— (1) Where, in the course of
any proceedings under this Ordinance, any person has either in the said
proceedings or in any earlier proceedings concealed income or furnished
inaccurate particulars of such income and revenue impact of such concealment or
furnishing of inaccurate particulars of such income is five hundred thousand rupees
or more shall commit an offence punishable on conviction with imprisonment upto
two years or with fine or both.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), concealment of income or the
furnishing of inaccurate particulars of income shall include–
(a) the suppression of any income or amount chargeable to tax;
(b) the claiming of any deduction for any expenditure not actually
incurred; or
(c) any act referred to in sub-section (1) of section 111.]
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2024.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2009.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2009.
1[192B. Prosecution for concealment of an offshore asset.- (1) Any person who
fails to declare an offshore asset to the Commissioner or furnished inaccurate
particulars of an offshore asset and revenue impact of such concealment or
furnishing of inaccurate particulars is ten million rupees or more shall commit an
offence punishable on conviction with imprisonment up to three years or with a fine
up to five hundred thousand Rupees or both.]
193. Prosecution for failure to maintain records.—A person who fails to
maintain records as required under this Ordinance shall commit an offence
punishable on conviction with –
(a) where the failure was deliberate, a fine2[not exceeding fifty
thousand rupees] or imprisonment for a term not exceeding
two years, or both; or
(b) in any other case, a fine3[not exceeding fifty thousand rupees].
194. Prosecution for improper use of National Tax Number 4[Certificate].—
A person who knowingly or recklessly uses a false National Tax Number
5[Certificate] including the National Tax Number 6[Certificate] of another person on
a return or other document prescribed or used for the purposes of this Ordinance
shall commit an offence punishable with a fine 7[not exceeding fifty thousand
rupees] or imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years, or both.
195. Prosecution for making false or misleading statements. — (1) A person
who –
(a) makes a statement to 8[an income tax authority] that is false or
misleading in a material particular; or
(b) omits from a statement made to 9[an income tax authority] any matter
or thing without which the statement is misleading in a material
particular,
shall commit an offence punishable on conviction –
New sub section 192B inserted through Finance Act, 2019.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2009.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2008.
The word “Card” substituted by the Finance Act, 2005.
The word “Card” substituted by the Finance Act, 2005.
The word “Card” substituted by the Finance Act, 2005.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2009.
The words “a taxation officer” substituted by the Finance Act, 2002.
The words “a taxation officer” substituted by the Finance Act, 2002.
(i) where the statement or omission was made knowingly or
recklessly, with a fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding
two years, or both; or
(ii) in any other case, with a fine.
(2) A person shall not commit an offence under sub-section (1) if the
person did not know and could not reasonably be expected to have known that the
statement to which the prosecution relates was false or misleading.
(3) 1[“Entry against S.No 10 in column (2) of the Table in sub-section (1)
of section 182”] shall apply in determining whether a person has made a statement
to 2[an income tax authority].
3[195A. Prosecution for non-compliance with notice under section 116A.—
Any person who, without reasonable excuse, fails to comply with a notice under
sub-section (2) of section 116A; shall commit an offence punishable on conviction
with imprisonment up to one year or with a fine up to fifty thousand Rupees or both.
195B. Prosecution for enabling offshore tax evasion.– Any enabler who
enables, guides or advises any person to design, arrange or manage a transaction
or declaration in such a manner which results in offshore tax evasion, shall commit
an offence punishable on conviction with imprisonment for a term not exceeding
seven years or with a fine up to five million Rupees or both.]
196. Prosecution for obstructing 4[an income tax authority. —] A person who
obstructs 5[an income tax authority]in discharge of functions under this Ordinance
shall commit an offence punishable on conviction with a fine or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding one year, or both.
197. Prosecution for disposal of property to prevent attachment. — Where
the owner of any property, or a person acting on the owner’s behalf or claiming
under the owner, sells, mortgages, charges, leases or otherwise deals with the
property after the receipt of a notice from the Commissioner with a view to
preventing the Commissioner from attaching it, shall commit an offence punishable
on conviction with a fine 6[upto hundred thousand rupees] or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding three years, or both.
Substituted “Sub-section (3) of section 187” by the Finance Act, 2015.
The words “a taxation officer” substituted by the Finance Act, 2002.
New sub-sections (195A) & (195B) inserted through Finance Act, 2019.
The words “a taxation officer” substituted by the Finance Act, 2002.
The words “a taxation officer” substituted by the Finance Act, 2002.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2009.
198. Prosecution for unauthorised disclosure of information by a public
servant.— A person who discloses any particulars in contravention of 1[sub-
section 1B of section 107 or] section 216 shall commit an offence punishable on
conviction with a fine 2[of not less than five hundred thousand rupees] or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3[one year], or both.
199. Prosecution for abetment. — Where a person 4[knowingly and wilfully]
aids, abets, assists, incites or induces another person to commit an offence under
this Ordinance, the first-mentioned person shall commit an offence punishable on
conviction with a fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years, or
both.
200. Offences by companies and associations of persons. — (1) Where an
offence under this Part is committed by a company, every person who, at the time
the offence was committed, was –
(a) the principal officer, a director, general manager, company secretary
or other similar officer of the company; o
(b) acting or purporting to act in that capacity,
shall be, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, guilty of the offence
and all the provisions of this Ordinance shall apply accordingly.
(2) Where an offence under this Part is committed by an association of
persons, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was a member
of the association shall be, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law,
guilty of the offence and all the provisions of this Ordinance shall apply accordingly.
(3) Sub-sections (1) and (2) shall not apply to a person where –
(a) the offence was committed without the person’s consent or
knowledge; and
(b) the person has exercised all diligence to prevent the
commission of the offence as ought to have been exercised
having regard to the nature of the person’s functions and all the
circumstances.
201. Institution of prosecution proceedings without prejudice to other action.—
Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, a prosecution
for an offence against this Ordinance may be instituted without prejudice to any other
liability incurred by any person under this Ordinance.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2016.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2013.
The words “six months” substituted by the Finance Act, 2013.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
1[202. Power to compound offences.—Notwithstanding any provisions of this
Ordinance, where any person has committed any offence, the 2[Chief
Commissioner] may, with the prior approval of the Board, either before or after the
institution of proceedings, compound such offence subject to payment of tax due
along with 3[default surcharge]and penalty as is determined under the provisions
of this Ordinance.]
203. Trial by Special Judge.—4[(1) The Federal Government may, by
notification in the official Gazette, appoint as many Special Judges as it may
consider necessary, and where it appoints more than one Special Judge, it shall
specify in the notification the territorial limits within which each of them shall
exercise jurisdiction 5[:
Provided that the Federal Government may, by notification in official
Gazette, declare that a special judge appointed under section 185 of the Customs
Act 1969 (IV of 1969) shall have jurisdiction to try offences under this Ordinance.]
6[(1A) A Special Judge shall be a person who is or has been a Sessions Judge
and shall, on appointment, have the jurisdiction to try exclusively an offence punishable
under this Part other than an offence referred to in section 198.]
7[(1B) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of
1898), except those of Chapter XXXVIII, thereof shall apply to the proceedings of
the court of a Special Judge and, for the purposes of the said provisions, the court
of Special Judge shall be deemed to be a Court of Sessions trying cases, and a
person conducting prosecution before the court of a Special Judge shall be
deemed to be a Public Prosecutor.]
(2) A Special Judge shall take cognisance of, and have jurisdiction to try,
an offence triable under sub-section (1) only upon a complaint in writing made by
the Commissioner 8[:
Section 202 substituted by the Finance Act, 2009. The substituted sub-section “202” read as follows:
“202. Power to compound offences.- Where any person has committed any offence under this
Part, the Commissioner may either before or after the institution of proceedings, compound such
offence and order that such person pay the amount for which the offence may be compounded.”
The words “Director General” substituted by Finance Act, 2012.
The words “additional tax” substituted by Finance Act, 2010.
Sub-section (1) substituted by Finance Act, 2010. The substituted sub-section (1) read as follows:
“(1) The Federal Government” may, by notification in the official Gazette, appoint as many
special judges as it may consider necessary, and where it appoints more than one Special Judge,
shall specify in the notification the territorial limits within which each of them shall exercise
jurisdiction.”
Full stop substituted by a colon and a proviso added by the Finance Act, 2014.
Inserted by Finance Act, 2010.
Inserted by Finance Act, 2010.
Full stop substituted and proviso added by the Finance Act, 2021.
Provided that where the offence of concealment of income which has
resulted in non-payment of tax of rupees one hundred and above in case of a filer
and rupees twenty five million or above in case of non-filer, the procedure provided
in section 203B shall be applicable.]
1[(3) The Federal Government may, by order in writing, direct the transfer, at
any stage of the trial, of any case from the court of one Special Judge to the court
of another Special Judge for disposal, whenever it appears to the Federal
Government that such transfer shall promote the ends of justice or tend to the
general convenience of parties or witnesses.]
2[(4) In respect of a case transferred to a Special Judge by virtue of sub-section
(1) or under sub-section (3), such Judge shall not, by reason of the said transfer, be
bound to recall and record again any witness who has given evidence in the case before
the transfer and may act on the evidence already recorded by or produced before the
court which tried the case before the transfer.]
3[203A. Appeal against the order of a Special Judge.— An appeal against the
order of a Special Judge shall lie to the respective High Court of a Province within
thirty days of the passing of the order and it shall be heard as an appeal under the
Code of Criminal Procedure 1898 (Act V of 1898) by a single Judge of the High
Court.]
4[203B. Power to arrest and prosecute.—(1) Where on the basis of material
evidence brought on record, as a result of audit conducted by the auditors in terms
of sub-section (8) of section 177 read with section 214C of this Ordinance, an
assessment is made or amended under section 121 or 122 of this Ordinance, as
the case may be, and the assessing officer records a finding that the taxpayer has
committed the offence of concealment of income which has resulted in non-
payment of tax of Rupees one hundred million and above in case of a filer and
rupees twenty five million or above in case of non-filer, the taxpayer may be
arrested after obtaining written approval of the committee specified under sub-
section (2).
(2) The committee under sub-section (1) shall comprise the Minister for
Finance and Revenue, the Chairman of the Board and the senior most member of
the Board.
(3) All arrests made under this Ordinance shall be carried out in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of
1898).
Inserted by Finance Act, 2010.
Inserted by Finance Act, 2010.
Inserted by Finance Act, 2010.
4 Sections 203B to 203I added by the Finance Act, 2021.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2) or any
other provision of this Ordinance, where any person has committed offence of
concealment of income or any offence warranting prosecution under this
Ordinance, the Chief Commissioner with the prior approval of the Board may,
either before or after the institution of any proceedings for recovery of tax,
compound the offence if such person pays the amount of tax due along with such
default surcharge and penalty as is determined under the provisions of this
Ordinance.
(5) Where the person suspected of offence of concealment of income or
any offence warranting prosecution under this Ordinance is a company, every
director or officer of that company whom the authorised officer has reason to
believe is personally responsible for actions of the company contributing to offence
of concealment of income or any offence warranting prosecution under this
Ordinance shall be liable to arrest:
Provided that any arrest under this sub-section shall not absolve the
company from the liabilities of payment of tax, default surcharge and penalty
imposed under this Ordinance.
203C. Procedure to be followed on arrest of a person.— (1) When an officer of
Inland Revenue authorized under sub-section (1) of section 203B in this behalf
arrests a person under section 203B, he shall immediately intimate the fact of the
arrest of that person to the Special Judge who may direct such officer to produce
that person at such time and place and on such date as the Special Judge
considers expedient and such Officer shall act accordingly.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the sub-section (1), any person
arrested under this Ordinance shall be produced before the Special Judge or, if
there is no Special Judge within a reasonable distance, to the nearest Judicial
Magistrate, within twenty-four hours of such arrest, excluding the time necessary
for the journey from the place of arrest to the Court of the Special Judge or, as the
case may be, of such Magistrate.
(3) When any person is produced under sub-section (2) before the Special
Judge, he may, on the request of such person, after perusing the record, if any
and after giving the prosecution an opportunity of being heard, admit him to bail on
his executing a bond, with or without sureties, or refuse to admit him to bail and
direct his detention at such place as he deems fit:
Provided that nothing herein contained shall preclude the Special Judge
from cancelling the bail of any such person at a subsequent stage if, for any
reason, he considers such cancellation necessary, but before passing such order
he shall afford such person an opportunity of being heard, unless for reasons to
be recorded he considers that the affording of such opportunity shall defeat the
purposes of this Ordinance.
(4) When such person is produced under sub-section (2) before a Judicial
Magistrate, such Magistrate may, after authorising his detention in such custody
at such place and for such period as he considers necessary or proper for
facilitating his earliest production before the Special Judge, direct his production
before the Special Judge on a date and time to be fixed by him or direct such
person to be forthwith taken to, and produced before, the Special Judge and he
shall be so taken.
(5) Nothing in sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) shall preclude the Special
Judge or the Judicial Magistrate from remanding any such person to the custody
of an officer of Inland Revenue holding inquiry against that person if such officer
makes a request in writing to that effect, and the Special Judge or the Judicial
Magistrate, after perusing the record, if any, and hearing such person, is of the
opinion that for the completion of inquiry or investigation it is necessary to make
such order:
Provided that the period of such custody shall not exceed more than fourteen
days.
(6) When any person is arrested under this Ordinance, an officer of Inland
Revenue shall record the fact of arrest and other relevant particulars in the register
specified in sub-section (10) and shall immediately proceed to inquire into the
charge against such person and if he completes the inquiry within twenty four
hours of his arrest, excluding the time necessary for journey as aforesaid, he may,
after producing such person before the Special Judge or the nearest Judicial
Magistrate, make a request for his further detention in his custody.
(7) While holding an inquiry under sub-section (6), an officer of Inland
Revenue shall exercise the same powers as are exercisable by an officer in charge
of a police station under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898), but
such officer shall exercise such powers subject to the foregoing provisions of this
section while holding an inquiry under this Ordinance.
(8) If an officer of Inland Revenue, after holding an inquiry as aforesaid, is of
the opinion that there is no sufficient evidence or reasonable ground for suspicion
against such person, he shall release him on his executing a bond, with or without
sureties, and shall direct such person to appear, as and when required, before the
Special Judge, and make a report to the Special Judge for the discharge of such
person and shall make a full report of the case to his immediate superior.
(9) The Special Judge to whom a report has been made under sub-section,
(8) may, after the perusal of record of the inquiry, and hearing the prosecution,
agree with such report and discharge the accused or, if he is of the opinion that
there is sufficient ground for proceedings against such person, proceed with his
trial and direct the prosecution to produce evidence.
(10) An officer of Inland Revenue empowered to hold inquiry under this
section shall maintain a register to be called “Register of Arrests and Detentions”
in the prescribed form in which he shall enter the name and other particulars of
every person arrested under this Ordinance, together with the time and date of
arrest, the details of the information received, the details of things, goods or
documents, recovered from his custody, the name of the witnesses and the
explanation, if any, given by him and the manner in which the inquiry has been
conducted from day to day and, such register or authenticated copies of its
aforesaid entries shall be produced before the Special Judge, whenever such
Officer is so directed by him.
(11) After completing the inquiry, an officer of Inland Revenue shall, as early
as possible, submit to Special Judge a complaint in the same form and manner in
which the officer in-charge of a police station submits a report, before a court.
(12) Magistrate of the first class may record any statement or confession
during inquiry under this Ordinance, in accordance with the provisions of section
164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898).
(13) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, Board, with
the approval of the Federal Minister-in-charge, may, by notification in the official
Gazette, authorize any other officer working under the Board to exercise the
powers and perform the functions of an officer of Inland Revenue under this
section, subject to such conditions, if any, that it may deem fit to impose.
203D. Special Judges.— (1) The Federal Government shall by notification in the
official Gazette, appoint as many Special Judges as it considers necessary and,
where it appoints more than one Special Judge, it shall specify in the notification
the headquarter of each Special Judge and the territorial limits within which he
shall exercise jurisdiction under this Ordinance.
(2) No person shall be appointed as a Special Judge unless he is or has
been a Sessions Judge.
203E. Cognizance of offences by Special Judges.— (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in this Ordinance or any other law for the time being in force, a
Special Judge may, within the limits of his jurisdiction, take cognizance of any
offence punishable under this Ordinance upon—
(a) a report in writing made by an officer of Inland Revenue or by any other
officer especially authorized in this behalf by the Federal Government;
or
(b) receiving a complaint or information of facts constituting such offence
made or communicated by any person; or
(c) his own knowledge acquired during any proceeding before him under
this Ordinance or under any other law for the time being in force.
(2) Upon the receipt of report under clause (a) of sub-section (1), the Special
Judge shall proceed with the trial of the accused.
(3) Upon the receipt of a complaint or information under clause (b), or
acquired in the manner referred to in clause (c) of subsection (1), the Special Judge
may, before issuing a summon or warrant for appearance of the person
complained against, hold a preliminary inquiry for the purpose of ascertaining the
truth or falsehood of the complaint, or direct any magistrate or any officer of Inland
Revenue or any police officer to hold such inquiry and submit a report, and such
Magistrate or officer shall conduct such inquiry and make report accordingly.
(4) If, after conducting such inquiry or after considering the report of such
Magistrate or officer, the Special Judge is of the opinion that there is—
(a) no sufficient ground for proceeding, he may dismiss the complaint, or
(b) sufficient ground for proceeding, he may proceed against the person
complained against in accordance with law.
(5) A special Judge or a Magistrate or an officer holding inquiry under sub-
section (3) may hold such inquiry, as early as possible, in accordance with the
provision of section 202 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898).
203F. Special Judge, etc. to have exclusive jurisdiction.— Notwithstanding
anything contained in this Ordinance or in any other law for the time being in force
no,–
(a) court other than the Special Judge having jurisdiction, shall try an
offence punishable under this Ordinance;
(b) other court or officer, except in the manner and to the extent
specifically provided for in this Ordinance, shall exercise any power,
or perform any function under this Ordinance;
(c) court, other than the High Court, shall entertain, hear or decide any
application, petition or appeal under chapters XXXI and XXXII of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898), against or in
respect of any order or direction made under this Ordinance; and
(d) no court, other than the Special Judge or the High Court, shall
entertain any application or petition or pass any order or give any
direction under chapters XXXVII, XXXIX, XLIV or XLV of the aforesaid
Code.
203G. Provisions of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, to apply.— (1) The
provision of the Code of Criminal procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898), so far as they
are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance, shall apply to the
proceedings of the court of a Special Judge and such court shall be deemed to be
a court of Sessions for the purpose of the said Code and the provisions of Chapter
XXIIA of the foresaid Code, so far as applicable and with the necessary
modifications, shall apply to the trial of cases by the Special Judge under this
Ordinance.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1898 (Act V of 1898), shall have effect as if an offence punishable under this
Ordinance were one of the offences referred to in sub-section (1) of section 337 of
the said Code.
203H. Transfer of cases.—(1) Where more than one Special Judge are appointed
within the territorial jurisdiction of a High Court, the High Court, and where not more
than one Special Judge is so appointed, the Federal Government, may by order in
writing direct the transfer, at any stage of the trial, of any case from the court of
one Special Judge to the Court of another Special Judge for disposal, whenever it
appears to the High Court or, as the case may be, the Federal Government, that
such transfer may promote the ends of justice or tend to the general convenience
of the parties or witnesses.
(2) In respect of a case transferred to a Special Judge under subsection (1),
such Special Judge shall not by reason of the said transfer, be bound to recall and
rehear any witness whose evidence has been recorded in the case before the
transfer and may act upon the evidence already recorded or produced before the
court which tried the case before the transfer.
203I. Place of sittings.—A Special Judge shall ordinarily hold sittings at his
headquarters but, keeping in view the general convenience of the parties or the
witnesses, he may hold sittings at any other place.]
204. Power to tender immunity from prosecution.— (1) The 1[Board with the
approval of the Minister-in-charge] may, for the purpose of obtaining the evidence
of any person appearing to have been directly or indirectly concerned in, or privy
to the concealment of income or to the evasion of tax, tender to such person
immunity from prosecution for any offence under this Ordinance or under the
Pakistan Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860), or under any other Federal Law on
condition of the person making full and true disclosure of the whole circumstances
relating to the concealment of income or evasion of tax.
The words “Federal Government” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
(2) A tender of immunity made to, and accepted by, the person concerned
shall render the person immune from prosecution for any offence in respect of
which the tender was made and to the extent specified in the immunity.
(3) If it appears to the 1[Board with the approval of the Minister-in-charge]
that any person to whom immunity has been tendered under this section has not
complied with the conditions on which the tender was made or is concealing
anything or giving false evidence, the 2[Board with the approval of the Minister-in-
charge] may withdraw the immunity, and any such person may be tried for the
offence in respect of which the tender of immunity was made or for any other
offence of which the person appears to have been guilty in connection with the
same matter.
