Division I
Income from Business
18. Income from business.— (1) The following incomes of a person for a tax
year, other than income exempt from tax under this Ordinance, shall be chargeable
to tax under the head “Income from Business” —
(a) the profits and gains of any business carried on by a person at any time
in the year;
(b) any income derived by any trade, professional or similar association from
the sale of goods or provision of services to its members 1[.
Explanation.– For the removal of doubt, it is clarified that income
derived by co-operative societies 2[including recreational club] from the
sale of goods, immoveable property or provision of services to its
(h) any expenditure paid or payable by the person in the tax year for legal services acquired to defend the
person’s title to the property or any suit connected with the property in a Court; and
(i) where there are reasonable grounds for believing that any unpaid rent in respect of the
property is irrecoverable, an allowance equal to the unpaid rent where –
(i) the tenancy was bona fide, the defaulting tenant has vacated the property or steps have
been taken to compel the tenant to vacate the property, and the defaulting tenant is not
in occupation of any other property of the person;
(ii) the person has taken all reasonable steps to institute legal proceedings for the recovery
of the unpaid rent or has reasonable grounds to believe that legal proceedings would
be useless; and
(iii) the unpaid rent has been included in the income of the person chargeable to tax under
the head “Income from Property” for the tax year in which the rent was due and tax has
been duly paid on such income.
(2) Where any unpaid rent allowed as a deduction under clause (i) of sub-section (1) is
wholly or partly recovered, the amount recovered shall be chargeable to tax in the tax year in which it
is recovered.
(3) Where a person has been allowed a deduction for any expenditure incurred in deriving
rent chargeable to tax under the head “Income from Property” and the person has not paid the liability
or a part of the liability to which the deduction relates within three years of the end of the tax year in
which the deduction was allowed, the unpaid amount of the liability shall be chargeable to tax under
the head “Income from Property” in the first tax year following the end of the three years.
(4) Where an unpaid liability is chargeable to tax as a result of the application of sub-section
(3) and the person subsequently pays the liability or a part of the liability, the person shall be allowed a
deduction for the amount paid in the tax year in which the payment is made.
(5) Any expenditure allowed to a person under this section as a deduction shall not be
allowed as a deduction in computing the income of the person chargeable to tax under any other head
of income.
(6) The provisions of section 21 shall apply in determining the deductions allowed to a
person under this section in the same manner as they apply in determining the deductions allowed in
computing the income of a person chargeable to tax under the head “Income from Business”.”
1 Semi colon substituted and Explanation added by the Finance Act, 2021.
Words inserted by the Finance Act, 2025.
members is and has always been chargeable to tax under the
provisions of this Ordinance;]
(c) any income from the hire or lease of tangible movable property;
(d) the fair market value of any benefit or perquisite, whether
convertible into money or not, derived by a person in the course
of, or by virtue of, a past, present, or prospective business
relationship1[.]
2[Explanation. — For the purposes of this clause, it is declared that
the word ‘benefit’ includes any benefit derived by way of waiver of
profit on debt or the debt itself under the State Bank of Pakistan
Banking Policy Department’s Circular No.29 of 2002 or in any other
scheme issued by the State Bank of Pakistan;]
(e) any management fee derived by a management company
(including a modaraba 3[management company] ).]
4[Explanation.—For the removal of doubt it is clarified that
income subject to taxation under sections 5A, 5AA, 6, 7 and 7A
shall not be chargeable to tax under this section.”]
(2) Any profit on debt derived by a person where the person’s business is
to derive such income shall be chargeable to tax under the head “Income from
Business” and not under the head “Income from Other Sources”.
5[(3) Where a 6[lessor], being a scheduled bank or an investment bank or
a development finance institution or a modaraba or a leasing company has leased
out any asset, whether owned by it or not, to another person, any amount paid or
payable by the said person in connection with the lease of said asset shall be
treated as the income of the said 7[lessor] and shall be chargeable to tax under the
head “Income from Business”.]
8[(4) Any amount received by a banking company or a non-banking finance
company, where such amount represents distribution by a mutual fund 9[or a
The semi-colon and the word “and” substituted by the Finance Act, 2011.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2011.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2002
Added by the Finance Act, 2018
Added by the Finance Act, 2003.
The word “lesser” substituted by the word “lessor” by the Finance Act, 2014.
The word “lesser” substituted by the word “lessor” by the Finance Act, 2014.
Added by the Finance Act, 2003.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2007.
Private Equity and Venture Capital Fund] out of its income from profit on debt, shall
be chargeable to tax under the head “Income from Business” and not under the
head “Income from Other Sources”.]
19. Speculation business.— (1) Where a person carries on a speculation
business –
(a) that business shall be treated as distinct and separate from any
other business carried on 1[by]the person;
(b) this Part shall apply separately to the speculation business and
the other business of the person; b head “Income from
Business” for that year; and
(e) any loss of the person arising from the speculation business
sustained for a tax year computed in accordance with this Part
shall be dealt with under section 58.
(2) In this section, “speculation business” means any business in which a
contract for the purchase and sale of any commodity (including 2[stocks] and
shares) is periodically or ultimately settled otherwise than by the actual delivery or
transfer of the commodity, but does not include a business in which —
(a) a contract in respect of raw materials or merchandise is entered
into by a person in the course of a manufacturing or mercantile
business to guard against loss through future price fluctuations
for the purpose of fulfilling the person’s other contracts for the
actual delivery of the goods to be manufactured or merchandise
to be sold;
(b) a contract in respect of stocks and shares is entered into by a
dealer or investor therein to guard against loss in the person’s
holding of stocks and shares through price fluctuations; or
(c) a contract is entered into by a member of a forward market or
stock exchange in the course of any transaction in the nature of
jobbing 3[arbitrage] to guard against any loss which may arise in
the ordinary course of the person’s business as such member.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2002
The word “stock” substituted by the Finance Act, 2005.
The word “arbitrate” substituted by the Finance Act, 2005.
