PART VII
REPRESENTATIVES
172. Representatives.— (1) For the purposes of this Ordinance and subject to
sub-sections (2) and (3), “representative” in respect of a person for a tax year,
means –
(a) where the person is an individual under a legal disability, the guardian
or manager who receives or is entitled to receive income on behalf, or
for the benefit of the individual;
(b) where the person is a company (other than a trust, a Provincial
Government, or 1[Local Government] in Pakistan), the principal officer
of the company;
(c) where the person is a trust declared by a duly executed instrument in
writing whether testamentary or otherwise (including any Wakf deed
which is valid under the MussalmanWakf Validation Act, 1913 (VI of
1913)), any trustee of the trust;
(d) where the person is a Provincial Government, or 2[Local Government]
in Pakistan, any individual responsible for accounting for the receipt
and payment of moneys or funds on behalf of the Provincial
Government or3[Local Government];
(e) where the person is an association of persons, the principal officer of
the association or, in the case of a firm, any partner in the firm;
(f) where the person is the Federal Government, any individual
responsible for accounting for the receipt and payment of moneys or
funds on behalf of the Federal Government; or
(g) where the person is a public international organisation, or a foreign
government or political sub-Division of a foreign government, any
individual responsible for accounting for the receipt and payment of
moneys or funds in Pakistan on behalf of the organisation,
government, or political sub-Division of the government.
(2) Where the Court of Wards, the Administrator General, the Official
Trustee, or any receiver or manager appointed by, or under, any order of a Court
receives or is entitled to receive income on behalf, or for the benefit of any person,
The words “local authority” substituted by the Finance Act, 2008.
The words “local authority” substituted by the Finance Act, 2008.
The words “local authority” substituted by the Finance Act, 2008.
such Court of Wards, Administrator General, Official Trustee, receiver, or manager
shall be the representative of the person for a tax year for the purposes of this
Ordinance.
(3) Subject to sub-sections (4) and (5), where a person is a non-resident
person, the representative of the person for the purposes of this Ordinance for a
tax year shall be any person in Pakistan –
(a) who is employed by, or on behalf of, the non-resident person;
(b) who has any business connection with the non-resident
person1[:]
2[Explanation.— In this clause the expression “business
connection” includes transfer of an asset or business in Pakistan
by a non-resident;]
(c) from or through whom the non-resident person is in receipt of
any income, whether directly or indirectly;
(d) who holds, or controls the receipt or disposal of any money
belonging to the non-resident person;
(e) who is the trustee of the non-resident person; or
(f) who is declared by the Commissioner by 3[an order] in writing to
be the representative of the non-resident person.
(4) A bonafide independent broker in Pakistan who, in respect of any
transactions, does not deal directly with, or on behalf of, a non-resident principal
but deals with, or through a non-resident broker, shall not be treated as a
representative of the non-resident principal in respect of such transactions, if –
(a) the transactions are carried on in the ordinary course of
business through the first-mentioned broker; and
(b) the non-resident broker is carrying on such transactions in the
ordinary course of its business and not as a principal.
(5) No person shall be declared 4[ ] as the representative of a non-
resident person unless the person has been given an opportunity by the
Commissioner of being heard.
Semi-colon substituted by the Finance Act, 2013.
Added by the Finance Act, 2013.
Substituted for the word “notice” by the Finance Act, 2003.
The words “or treated” omitted by the Finance Act, 2003.
173. Liability and obligations of representatives. — (1) Every representative
of a person shall be responsible for performing any duties or obligations imposed
by or under this Ordinance on the person, including the payment of tax.
(2) Subject to sub-section (4), any tax that, by virtue of sub-section (1), is
payable by a representative of a taxpayer shall be recoverable from the
representative only to the extent of any assets of the taxpayer that are in the
possession or under the control of the representative.
(3) Every representative of a taxpayer who pays any tax owing by the
taxpayer shall be entitled to recover the amount so paid from the taxpayer or to
retain the amount so paid out of any moneys of the taxpayer that are in the
representative’s possession or under the representative’s control.
1[(3A) Any representative, or any person who apprehends that he may be
assessed as a representative, may retain out of any money payable by him to the
person on whose behalf he is liable to pay tax (hereinafter in this section referred
to as the “principal”), a sum equal to his estimated liability under this Ordinance,
and in the event of disagreement between the principal and such a representative
or a person as to the amount to be so retained, such representative or person may
obtain from the Commissioner a certificate stating the amount to be so retained
pending final determination of the tax liability, and the certificate so obtained shall
be his authority for retaining that amount.]
(4) Every representative shall be personally liable for the payment of any
tax due by the representative in a representative capacity if, while the amount
remains unpaid, the representative -
(a) alienates, charges or disposes of any moneys received or
accrued in respect of which the tax is payable; or
(b) disposes of or parts with any moneys or funds belonging to the
taxpayer that is in the possession of the representative or which
comes to the representative after the tax is payable, if such tax
could legally have been paid from or out of such moneys or
funds.
(5) Nothing in this section shall relieve any person from performing any
duties imposed by or under this Ordinance on the person which the representative
of the person has failed to perform.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
