PART I
GENERAL
1[207. Income tax authorities. — (1) There shall be the following Income Tax
authorities for the purposes of this Ordinance and rules made thereunder,
namely:—
Section 207 substituted by the Finance Act, 2010. The substituted provision has been made effective
from 05.06.2010 by sub-clause (77) of clause 8 of the Finance Act, 2010. Earlier the substitution was
made through Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2009 which was re-promulgated as Finance
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2010 and remained effective till 05.06.2010. The substituted section 207
read as follows:
“207. Income tax authorities.- (1) There shall be the following income tax authorities for the purposes
of this Ordinance and rules made thereunder, namely:-
(a) Board;
(b) Chief Commissioner Inland Revenue;
(c) Commissioner Inland Revenue;
(d) Commissioner Inland Revenue (Appeals);
(e) Additional Commissioner Inland Revenue;
(f) Deputy Commissioner Inland Revenue;
(g) Assistant Commissioner Inland Revenue;
(h) Officer of Inland Revenue;
(i) Special Officer Inland Revenue; and
(j) Inspector Inland Revenue.
(2) The Board shall examine, supervise and oversee the general administration of this
Ordinance.
(3) The Chief Commissioners Inland Revenue and Commissioners Inland Revenue
(Appeals) shall be subordinate to the Board and Commissioners Inland Revenue, shall be
subordinate to the Chief Commissioner Inland Revenue.
(4) Subject to sub-section (5), Additional Commissioners Inland Revenue, Deputy
Commissioners Inland Revenue, Assistant Commissioners Inland Revenue, Officer of Inland
Revenue, Special Officers Inland Revenue and Inspectors Inland Revenue shall be subordinate to
the Commissioners Inland Revenue.
(5) An officer vested with the powers and functions of the Commissioner, shall be
subordinate to the Chief Commissioner Inland Revenue.”
(a) Board:
(b) Chief Commissioner Inland Revenue;
(c) Commissioner Inland Revenue;
(d) Commissioner Inland Revenue (Appeals);
(e) Additional Commissioner Inland Revenue;
(f) Deputy Commissioner Inland Revenue;
(g) Assistant Commissioner Inland Revenue;
1[(ga) Special audit panel;”]
(h) Inland Revenue Officer;
(i) Inland Revenue Audit Officer;
2[(ia) District Taxation Officer Inland Revenue;
(ib) Assistant Director Audit.]
(j) Superintendent Inland Revenue;
(k) Inspector Inland Revenue; 3[ ]
(l) Auditor Inland Revenue; 4[and
(m) auditor appointed under section 222.]
(2) The Board shall examine, supervise and oversee the general
administration of this Ordinance.
5[(3) The income tax authorities specified in sub-section (1) except in
clause (a) shall be subordinate to the Board.]
6[(3A) Commissioners Inland Revenue, Additional Commissioners Inland
Revenue, Deputy Commissioners Inland Revenue, Assistant Commissioners
1 Inserted by Finance Act, 2015.
2 Inserted by Finance Act, 2017.
3 The word “and” omitted by the Finance Act, 2025.
4 The word “and” omitted by the Finance Act, 2025.
Sub-section (3) substituted by the Finance Act, 2012. The substituted sub-section (3) read as
follows:
“(3) The Chief Commissioners Inland Revenue and Commissioners Inland Revenue
(Appeals) shall be subordinate to the Board and Commissioners Inland Revenue, shall be
subordinate to the Chief Commissioner Inland Revenue.”
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2012.
Inland Revenue, Inland Revenue Officers, Inland Revenue Audit 1[Officers] 2[,
District Taxation Officer Inland Revenue, Assistant Director Audit],
Superintendents Inland Revenue, Auditors Inland Revenue and Inspectors Inland
Revenue, shall be subordinate to the Chief Commissioners Inland Revenue.]
(4) Subject to sub-section (5), Additional Commissioners Inland Revenue,
Deputy Commissioner Inland Revenue, Assistant Commissioners Inland Revenue,
Inland Revenue Officers, Inland Revenue Audit Officers 3[, District Taxation
Officer Inland Revenue, Assistant Director Audit], Superintendents Inland
Revenue, Auditors Inland Revenue and Inspectors Inland Revenue shall be
subordinate to the Commissioners Inland Revenue.
(4A) Deputy Commissioners Inland Revenue, Assistant Commissioners
Inland Revenue, Inland Revenue Officers, Inland Revenue Audit Officers 4[, District
Taxation Officer Inland Revenue, Assistant Director Audit], Superintendents Inland
Revenue, Auditors Inland Revenue and Inspectors Inland Revenue shall be
subordinate to the Additional Commissioners Inland Revenue.
(5) An officer vested with the powers and functions of Commissioner shall
be subordinate to the Chief Commissioner Inland Revenue.]
5[208. Appointment of income tax authorities.— 6[(1) The Board may appoint as
many Chief Commissioners Inland Revenue, Commissioners Inland Revenue,
Commissioners Inland Revenue (Appeals), Additional Commissioners Inland Revenue,
Deputy Commissioners Inland Revenue, Assistant Commissioners Inland Revenue,
Inland Revenue Officers, Inland Revenue Audit Officers 7[, District Taxation Officer
Inland Revenue, Assistant Director Audit],Superintendents Inland Revenue, Inspectors
Inland Revenue, Auditors Inland Revenue and such other executive or ministerial
officers and staff as may be necessary.]
The word “officer” substituted by finance act 2017.
2 Inserted by Finance Act, 2017.
3 Inserted by Finance Act, 2017.
4 Inserted by Finance Act, 2017.
Section 208 substituted by the Finance Act, 2002. The substituted section 208 read as follows:
“208. Central Board of Revenue.- The Central Board of Revenue shall exercise the general administration
of this Ordinance.”
Sub-section (1) substituted by the Finance Act, 2010. The substituted provision has been made effective from
05.06.2010 by sub-clause (77) of clause 8 of the Finance Act, 2010. Earlier the substitution was made through
Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2009 which was re-promulgated as Finance (Amendment) Ordinance,
2010 and remained effective till 05.06.2010. The substituted sub-section (1) read as follows:
“(1) The Central Board of Revenue may appoint as many Regional Commissioners of Income Tax,
Commissioners of Income Tax, Commissioners of Income Tax (Appeals), taxation officers and such other
executive or ministerial officers and staff as may be necessary.”
Inserted by Finance Act 2017.
(2) Subject to such orders or directions as may be issued by the 1[Board],
any income tax authority may appoint any income tax authority subordinate to it
and such other executive or ministerial officers and staff as may be necessary.
(3) All appointments, other than of valuers, chartered accountants or
experts, made under this Ordinance, shall be subject to rules and orders of the
Federal Government regulating the terms and conditions of persons in public
services and posts.]
2[209. Jurisdiction of income tax authorities. — 3[(1) Subject to this Ordinance,
the 4[Chief Commissioners], the Commissioners and the Commissioners (Appeals)
shall perform all or such functions and exercise all or such powers under this
Ordinance as may be assigned to them in respect of such persons or classes of
persons or such areas as the 5[Board] may direct 6[:] ]
7[Provided that the Board or the Chief Commissioner, as the case may
be, may transfer jurisdiction in respect of cases or persons from one
Commissioner to another.]
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
Section 209 substituted by the Finance Act, 2002. The substituted section 209 read as follows:
“209. Appointment of Regional Commissioners of Income Tax and Commissioners of Income Tax.-
(1) The Central Board of Revenue may appoint as many Regional Commissioners of Income Tax and
Commissioners of Income Tax as may be necessary.
(2) Subject to such orders or directions as may be issued by the Central Board of Revenue, any
Regional Commissioner of Income Tax may appoint any subordinate income tax authority subordinate and
such other executive or ministerial officers and staff as may be necessary.
(3) Subject to such orders or directions as may be issued by the Central Board of Revenue, any
Commissioner of Income Tax may appoint such executive or ministerial officers and staff as may be
necessary.
(4) All appointments under this Ordinance shall be subject to the rules and orders of the
Federal Government regulating the terms and conditions of service of persons in public services and
posts.”
Substituted by the Finance Act, 2003. The substituted sub-section (1) read as follows:
“(1) Subject to this Ordinance, the Regional Commissioners, the Commissioners and the
Commissioners (Appeals) shall perform all or such functions and exercise all or such powers, under
this Ordinance, in respect of such persons or classes of persons or such areas, as may be assigned
to them by orders or directions issued by the Central Board of Revenue.”
The words “Regional Commissioners” substituted by the Finance Act, 2010.
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act, 2011.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2011.
(2) The 1[Board] or the 2[Chief Commissioner] may, by an order, confer
upon or assign to any 3[officer of Inland Revenue] all or any of the powers and
functions conferred upon or assigned to the Commissioner, under this Ordinance,
in respect of any person or persons or classes of persons or areas 4[as may be
specified in the order] 5[;
Provided that the Board may also confer upon or assign to any Officer of
Inland Revenue the aforesaid powers and functions through Automated Case
Selection System:
Provided further that the Board may make rules for conferment or
assignment of such powers and functions through Automated Case Selection
System.]
6[Explanation.--- For the purpose of this sub-section, the expression “Automated
Case Selection System” means an algorithm for randomized allocation of cases
by using suitable technological modes.]
(3) An order under sub-section (2) by the 7[Chief Commissioner] shall be
made only with the approval of the 8[Board].
(4) The 9[Officer of Inland Revenue] referred to in sub-section (2) shall,
for the purposes of this Ordinance, be treated to be the Commissioner.
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
The words “Regional Commissioner” substituted by the Finance Act, 2010. The substituted provision
has been made effective from 05.06.2010 by sub-clause (77) of clause 8 of the Finance Act, 2010.
Earlier the substitution was made through Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2009 which was re-
promulgated as Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2010 and remained effective till 05.06.2010.
The words “taxation officer” substituted by Finance Act, 2010. The substituted provision has been
made effective from 05.06.2010 by sub-clause (77) of clause 8 of the Finance Act, 2010. Earlier the
substitution was made through Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2009 which was re-promulgated
as Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2010 and remained effective till 05.06.2010.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
In sub-section (2) for the full stop at the end, a colon shall be substituted and thereafter provisos
added through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020.
6 Explanation added through Finance act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
The words “Regional Commissioner” substituted by the Finance Act, 2010. The substituted provision
has been made effective from 05.06.2010 by sub-clause (77) of clause 8 of the Finance Act, 2010.
Earlier the substitution was made through Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2009 which was re-
promulgated as Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2010 and remained effective till 05.06.2010.
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
The words “taxation officer” substituted by the Finance Act, 2010. The substituted provision has been
made effective from 05.06.2010 by sub-clause (77) of clause 8 of the Finance Act, 2010. Earlier the
substitution was made through Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2009 which was re-promulgated
as Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2010 and remained effective till 05.06.2010.
(5) Within the area assigned to him, the Commissioner shall have
jurisdiction, —
(a) in respect of any person carrying on business, if the person’s
place of business is within such area, or where the business is
carried on in more than one place, the person’s principal place
of business is within such area; or
(b) in respect of any other person, if the person resides in such
area:
(6) Where a question arises as to whether a Commissioner has
jurisdiction over a person, the question shall be decided by the 1[Chief
Commissioner] or 2[Chief Commissioners] concerned and, if they are not in
agreement, by the 3[Board].
(7) No person shall call into question the jurisdiction of a Commissioner
after that person has furnished a return of income to the Commissioner or, where
the person has not furnished a return of income, after the time allowed by any
notice served on the person for furnishing such return has expired.
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, every
Commissioner shall have all the powers conferred by, or under, this Ordinance on
him in respect of any income arising within the area assigned to him.
4[(8A) The power to confer jurisdiction under this section shall include the
power to transfer jurisdiction from one income tax authority to another.]
(9) Where, in respect of any proceedings under this Ordinance, an
income tax authority is succeeded by another, the succeeding authority may
continue the proceedings from the stage it was left by that authority’s predecessor.]
5[209A. Uniform.- The Board may by notification in the official gazette, prescribe
rules for wearing of uniform by officers and staff of Inland Revenue Service of
Pakistan.]
The words “Regional Commissioner” substituted by the Finance Act, 2010. The substituted provision
has been made effective from 05.06.2010 by sub-clause (77) of clause 8 of the Finance Act, 2010.
Earlier the substitution was made through Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2009 which was re-
promulgated as Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2010 and remained effective till 05.06.2010.
The words “Regional Commissioners” substituted by the Finance Act, 2010. The substituted provision has been
made effective from 05.06.2010 by sub-clause (77) of clause 8 of the Finance Act, 2010. Earlier the substitution
was made through Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2009 which was re-promulgated as Finance (Amendment)
Ordinance, 2010 and remained effective till 05.06.2010.
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
5 Inserted by the Finance Act, 2022.
1[210. Delegation. —(1) The Commissioner 2[subject to sub-section (1A),] may,
by an order in writing, delegate to any 3[Officer of Inland Revenue, subordinate to
the Commissioner] all or any of the powers or functions conferred upon or assigned
to the Commissioner under this Ordinance, other than the power of delegation.
4[(1A) The Commissioner shall not delegate the powers of amendment of
assessment contained in sub-section (5A) of section 122 5[ and amendment of an
order of recovery under sub-section (3) of section 161] to 6[an officer of Inland
Revenue below the rank of Additional Commissioner Inland Revenue.]
7[(1B) The Commissioner may, by an order in writing, delegate to a special
audit panel appointed under sub-section (11) of section 177, or to a firm of
chartered accountants or a firm of cost and management accountants appointed
Substituted by the Finance Act, 2002. The substituted section 210 read as follows:
“210. Jurisdiction of Regional Commissioners of Income Tax and Commissioners of Income Tax.- (1)
Subject to this Ordinance, the Regional Commissioners of Income Tax and the Commissioners of Income Tax shall
perform such functions in respect of such persons or classes of person, or such areas, as may be assigned to them
by directions issued by the Central Board of Revenue.
(2)Where any directions issued under sub-section (1) have assigned to two or more income tax authorities
the same function in respect of the same persons or class of persons, or the same areas, they shall perform their
functions in accordance with such orders as the Central Board of Revenue, or any other authority to whom they
are subordinate, may make for the allocation of functions and the distribution of the work performed.
(3)Within a Commissioner’s assigned area, the Commissioner shall have jurisdiction, -
(a) in respect of any person carrying on business, if the person’s place of business is within
such area, or where the business is carried on in more than one place, the person’s
principal place of business is within such area; or
(b) in respect of any other person, if the person resides within such area.
(4)Where a question arises as to whether a Commissioner has jurisdiction over any person, the question
shall be decided by the Regional Commissioner or Regional Commissioners concerned and, if they are not in
agreement, by the Central Board of Revenue.
(5)No person shall call into question the jurisdiction of a Commissioner after the person has furnished a return
of income to the Commissioner or, where the person has not furnished a return, after the time allowed by any notice
served on the person for furnishing such return has expired.
(6)Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, every Commissioner shall have all the powers
conferred by, or under this Ordinance on a Commissioner in respect of any income arising within the
Commissioner’s assigned area.
(7)Where any application may be made by a person under this Ordinance, the application shall be made to
the Commissioner with jurisdiction over the person or to the taxation officer with delegated power in respect of the
application.”
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2004.
The words “taxation officer” substituted by Finance Act, 2010. The substituted provision has been made effective
from 05.06.2010 by sub-clause (77) of clause 8 of the Finance Act, 2010. Earlier the substitution was made
through Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2009 which was re-promulgated as Finance
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2010 and remained effective till 05.06.2010.
Added by the Finance Act, 2004.
5 The expression inserted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
The words “taxation officer below the rank of Additional Commissioner of Income Tax” substituted by
the Finance Act, 2010.
Substituted by Finance Act, 2015. The substituted sub-section (1B) read as follows:-
“(1B) The Commissioner may delegate the powers to a firm of chartered accountants or a
firm of Cost and Management Accountants]appointed by the Board or the Commissioner to
conduct the audit of persons for audit under section 177.”
by the Board or the Commissioner to conduct an audit of person under section
177, all or any of the powers or functions to conduct an audit under this Ordinance.]
(2) An order under sub-section (1) may be in respect of all or any of the
persons, classes of persons or areas falling in the jurisdiction of the Commissioner.
(3) The Commissioner shall have the power to cancel, modify, alter or
amend an order under sub-section (1).
1[211. Power or function exercised. —(1) Where, by virtue of an order under
section 210, a 2[an officer of Inland Revenue 3[or by a special audit panel appointed
under sub-section (11) of section 177] ] exercises a power or performs a function
of the Commissioner, such power or function shall be treated as having been
exercised or performed by the Commissioner.
(2) The exercise of a power, or the performance of a function, of the
Commissioner by a 4[an officer of Inland Revenue] shall not prevent the exercise
of the power, or the performance of the function, by the Commissioner.]
5[(3) The Board or, with the approval of the Board, an authority appointed
under this Ordinance, shall be competent to exercise all powers conferred upon
any authority subordinate to it.]
6[212. Authority of approval.— The 7[Board] may, by a general or special order,
authorise the 8[Chief Commissioner Inland Revenue] or the Commissioner to grant
approval in any case where such approval is required from the 9[Board] under any
provision of this Ordinance.]
Substituted by the Finance Act, 2002. The substituted section 211 read as follows:
“211. Delegation.- The Commissioner may delegate to any taxation officer any duty, power, or
function conferred or imposed on the Commissioner under this Ordinance, other than the power of
delegation under this section.”
The words “a taxation officer” substituted by Finance Act, 2010. The substituted provision has been
made effective from 05.06.2010 by sub-clause (77) of clause 8 of the Finance Act, 2010. Earlier the
substitution was made through Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2009 which was re-promulgated
as Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2010 and remained effective till 05.06.2010.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2015.
The words “a taxation officer” substituted by Finance (amendment) ordinance, 2009.
Added by the Finance Act, 2012.
Substituted by the Finance Act, 2002. The substituted section 212 read as follows:
“212. Authority of approval.- The Central Board of Revenue may, by general or special order, in writing,
authorise the Regional Commissioner or the Commissioner to grant approval in any case where such
approval is required from the Central Board of Revenue under any provision of this Ordinance.”
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
The words “Regional Commissioner” substituted by the Finance Act, 2021.
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
1[213. Guidance to income tax authorities.— In the course of any proceedings
under this Ordinance, the Commissioner or any taxation officer may be assisted,
guided or instructed by any income tax authority to whom he is subordinate or any
other person authorised in this behalf by the 2[Board].]
3[214. Income tax authorities to follow orders of the 4[Board]. —(1) Subject to
sub-section (2), all income tax authorities and other persons employed in the
execution of this Ordinance shall observe and follow the orders, instructions and
directions issued by the 5[Board].
(2) No orders, instructions or directions shall be given by the 6[Board] that
will interfere with the discretion of the Commissioner (Appeals) in the exercise of
his appellate function.]
7[214A. Condonation of time limit.— Where any time or period has been
specified under any of the provisions of the Ordinance or rules made there-under
within which any application is to be made or any act or thing is to be done, the
Board may, 8[at any time before or after the expiry of such time or period,] in any
case or class of cases, permit such application to be made or such act or thing to
be done within such time or period as it may consider appropriate 9[.]
10[Explanation,— For the purpose of this section, the expression “any act or
thing is to be done” includes any act or thing to be done by the taxpayer or by the
authorities specified in section 207.]
Provided that the Board may, by notification in the official Gazette, and
subject to such limitations or conditions as may be specified therein, empower
Substituted by the Finance Act, 2002. The substituted section 213 read as follows:
“213. Exercise of jurisdiction by successor.- Where, in respect of any proceedings under this
Ordinance, an income tax authority is succeeded by another, the succeeding authority may continue
the proceedings from the stage at which it was left by that authority’s predecessor.”
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
Section 214 substituted by the Finance Act, 2002. The substituted section 214 read as follows:
“214. Guidance to Commissioner or taxation officer.- In the course of any proceedings under this
Ordinance, the Commissioner or any taxation officer with delegated power under section 211 may
be assisted, guided or instructed by any income tax authority to whom he is subordinate or any other
person authorised in this behalf by the Central Board of Revenue.”
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2009.
Expression inserted by the Finance Act, 2022.
Colon substituted by the Finance Act, 2012.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2012.
any Commissioner or 1[Chief Commissioner] under this Ordinance to exercise
the powers under this section in any case or class of cases] 2[:
Provided further that regardless of anything stipulated in this section, or
any provision of this Ordinance, or any other applicable law currently in force,
and notwithstanding any decision, order or judgment issued by any forum,
authority or court, the maximum period of extension under this section by the
Board or the Commissioner, as the case may be, shall not exceed two years in
aggregate:
Provided also that where there are reasons to believe that significant
loss to exchequer or the taxpayer has been caused by an act of omission or
commission by the person or by the Commissioner, a committee of members as
notified by the Board may further condone the limitation specified for a period as
it may deem fit, after providing a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the
person concerned.]
3[214B. Power of the Board to call for records.— (1) The Board may, of its own
motion, call for and examine the record of any departmental proceedings under
this Ordinance or the rules made there-under for the purpose of satisfying itself as
to the legality or propriety of any decision or order passed therein and may pass
such order as it may think fit:
Provided that no order imposing or enhancing any tax or penalty than the
originally levied shall be passed unless the person affected by such order has
been given an opportunity of showing cause and of being heard.
(2) No proceedings under this section shall be initiated in a case where
an appeal is pending.
(3) No order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three
years from the date of original decision or order.]
4[214C. Selection for audit by the Board.— (1) The Board may select persons
or classes of persons for audit of Income Tax affairs through computer ballot which
may be random or parametric as the Board may deem fit.
5[(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Ordinance or any other
law, for the time being in force, the Board shall keep the parameters confidential.]
The words “Director General” substituted by the Finance Act, 2012.
Full stop substituted with a colon and thereafter two new provisos added by the Finance Act, 2025.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2009.
Added by the Finance Act, 2010.
Added by the Finance Act, 2013.
(2) Audit of Income Tax affairs of persons selected under sub-section (1)
shall be conducted as per procedure given in section 177 and all the provisions of
the Ordinance, except the first proviso to sub-section (1) of section 177, shall apply
accordingly.
(3) For the removal of doubt it is hereby declared that Board shall be
deemed always to have had the power to select any persons or classes of persons
for audit of Income Tax affairs.]
1[Explanation.— For the removal of doubt, it is declared that the
powers of the Commissioner under section 177 are independent of
the powers of the Board under this section and nothing contained in
this section restricts the powers of the Commissioner to call for the
record or documents including books of accounts of a taxpayer for
audit and to conduct audit under section 177.]
2[ ] 3[ ]
4[214E. Closure of audit.─ 5[(1)] Notwithstanding the omission of section 214D,
audit of income tax affairs of a taxpayer under sub-section (2) of section 214D
shall be deemed to have been concluded, if ─
(i) taxpayer has been selected for audit under sub-section (1) of the
omitted section 214D;
(ii) notice under section 122 has not been issued;
(iii) the taxpayer has revised return voluntarily, by thirty first day of
December, 2018, alongwith payment of 25% higher tax than the tax
Added by the Finance Act, 2013.
Section 214D Inserted by the Finance Act, 2015.
3 “
Section 214D omitted by the Finance Act, 2018. The omitted section 214D is read as follows: 214D. Automatic
selection for audit.—(1) A person shall be automatically selected for audit of its income tax affairs for a tax year, if—
the return is not filed within the date it is required to be filed as specified in section 118, or, as the case may be, not filed within
the time extended by the Board under section 214A or further extended for a period not exceeding thirty days by the Commissioner under
section 119; or the tax payable under sub-section (1) of section 137has not been paid.
(2) Audit of income tax affairs of persons automatically selected under sub-section (1) shall be conducted as per procedure
given in section 177 and all the provisions of this Ordinance shall apply accordingly:
Provided that audit proceedings shall only be initiated after the expiry of ninety days from the date as mentioned in sub-section
(1).
(3) Subject to section 182, 205 and 214C, sub-section (1) shall not apply if the person files the return within ninety days from
the date as mentioned in sub-section (1) and—
twenty-five percent higher tax, than the tax paid during immediately preceding tax year, has been paid by a person on the basis
of taxable income and had declared taxable income in the return for immediately preceding tax year; or
tax at the rate of two percent of the turnover or the tax payable under Part I of the First Schedule, whichever is higher, has
been paid by a person alongwith the return and in the immediately preceding tax year has either not filed a return or had declared income
below taxable limit:
Provided that where return has been filed for the immediately preceding tax year, turnover declared for the tax year is not less
than the turnover declared for the immediately preceding tax year.
(4) The provisions of sub-section (1) and sections 177 and214C shall not apply, for a tax year, to a person registered
as retailer under rule (4) of the Sales Tax Special Procedure Rules, 2007 subject to the condition that name of the person registered
under rule (4) of the Sales Tax Special Procedure Rules, 2007remained on the sales tax active taxpayers‘ list throughout the tax year.
(5) Sub-section (4) shall have effect from the date as the Board may, by notification in the official Gazette, appoint.
Inserted by the Finance Supplementary (Amendment) Act, 2018.
5 Provision re-numbered through Tax Law (Second Amendment) 2019, dated 26th December, 2019
paid with return on the basis of taxable income and where no tax is
payable 2% of the turnover and where no turnover is declared penalty
under entry at Serial No. 1 of sub-section (1) of section 182 has been
paid voluntarily:
Provided that the condition of revision, 25% higher tax or 2%
of the turnover shall not apply, if the taxable income of the taxpayer
includes only salary income or income subject to final taxation under
sub-section (1) of section 169 or subject to taxation under section 5,
5AA, 6, 7, 7A or 7B.
Explanation.— For the removal of doubt it is clarified that only
audit initiated as a result of automatic selection under the omitted
section 214D shall stand abated under this section and audit initiated
or to be initiated on the basis of definite information or otherwise as
per provisions of section 177 or 214C shall be conducted
independently.”]
1[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Board may
prescribe procedure for conclusion of audit of income tax affairs of a person
automatically selected for audit under omitted section 214D.
(3) The prescribed procedure under sub-section (2) may include
acceptance of declared income of a taxpayer for a tax year subject to conditions
specified therein.]
2[215. Furnishing of returns, documents etc. —(1) Where, by virtue of an order under
section 210, the Commissioner has delegated to any 3[an officer of Inland Revenue]the
function and power to receive, or to call for and receive, any returns of income,
certificates, documents, accounts and statements from any person 4[ ] the 5[person] shall
1 Sub-sections (2) & (3) inserted through Tax Law (Second Amendment) 2019 dated 26th December,
Section 215 substituted by the Finance Act, 2002. The substituted section 215 read as follows:
“215. Taxation officers to follow orders of Central Board of Revenue.- (1) Subject to sub-section
(2), all taxation officers and other persons employed in the execution of this Ordinance shall observe
and follow the orders, instructions and directions of the Central Board of Revenue.
(2) No orders, instructions or directions shall be given by the Central Board of Revenue
that will interfere with the discretion of the Commissioner (Appeals) in the exercise the appellate
function of the Commissioner (Appeals).”
The words “taxation officer” substituted by the Finance Act, 2010. The substituted provision has been
made effective from 05.06.2010 by sub-clause (77) of clause 8 of the Finance Act, 2010. Earlier the
substitution was made through Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2009 which was re-promulgated
as Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2010 and remained effective till 05.06.2010.
4 The words “or persons or class of persons (hereinafter called ‘filer’),” omitted through Finance Act, 2019.
The word “filer” substituted by “person” through Finance Act, 2019.
furnish such returns, certificates, documents, accounts and statements to that 1[officer of
Inland Revenue]and, when furnished, shall be treated as having been furnished to the
Commissioner.
(2) where a person is allowed, under any provision of this Ordinance, to
make an application to the Commissioner and the Commissioner has delegated to
any 2[officer of Inland Revenue]the function or power to receive the application,
such application, when made, shall be treated as having been made to the
Commissioner.]
216. Disclosure of information by a public servant.- (1) All particulars
contained in –
(a) any statement made, return furnished, or accounts or
documents produced under the provisions of this Ordinance;
(b) any evidence given, or affidavit or deposition made, in the
course of any proceedings under this Ordinance, other than
proceedings under Part XI of Chapter X; or
(c) any record of any assessment proceedings or any proceeding
relating to the recovery of a demand,
shall be confidential and no public servant save as provided in this Ordinance may
disclose any such particulars.
3[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Qanun-e-Shahadat, 1984
(P.O. No. 10 of 1984), the National Accountability Ordinance, 1999 (XVIII of 1999),
the Federal Investigation Agency Act, 1974 (VIII or 1975) and the Right of Access
to Information Act, 2017 (XXXIV of 2017), or any other law for the time being in
force, no court or any other authority shall, save as provided in the Ordinance,
The words “taxation officer” substituted by the Finance Act, 2010. The substituted provision has been
made effective from 05.06.2010 by sub-clause (77) of clause 8 of the Finance Act, 2010. Earlier the
substitution was made through Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2009 which was re-promulgated
as Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2010 and remained effective till 05.06.2010.
The words “taxation officer” substituted by the Finance Act, 2010. The substituted provision has been
made effective from 05.06.2010 by sub-clause (77) of clause 8 of the Finance Act, 2010. Earlier the
substitution was made through Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2009 which was re-promulgated
as Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2010 and remained effective till 05.06.2010.
The Sub-section (2) substituted by the Finance Act, 2022. The substituted sub-section read as
follows:
“(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Qanun-e-3[Shahadat], 1984 (P.O. Order No. 10 of
1984), or any other law for the time being in force, no court or other authority shall be, save as
provided in this Ordinance, entitled to require any public servant to produce before it any return,
accounts, or documents contained in, or forming a part of the records relating to any proceedings
under this Ordinance, or any records of the Income Tax Department generally, or any part thereof,
or to give evidence before it in respect thereof.”
require any public servant to produce before it any return, accounts, or documents
contained in, or forming a part of the records relating to any proceedings under the
Ordinance, or declarations made under the Voluntary Declaration of Domestic
Assets Act, 2018, the Foreign Assets (Declaration and Repatriation) Act, 2018 or
the Assets Declaration Act, 2019 or any records of the Income Tax Department
generally, or any part thereof, or to give evidence before it in respect thereof;]
(3) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall preclude the disclosure of
any such particulars –
(a) to any person acting in the execution of this Ordinance, where
it is necessary to disclose the same to him for the purposes of
this Ordinance;
(b) to any person authorised by the Commissioner in this behalf,
where it is necessary to disclose the same to such person for
the purposes of processing of data and preparation of computer
printouts relating to returns of income or calculation of tax;
1[(ba) to an auditor appointed on contractual basis or engaged through
a third party including a payroll firm in the Federal Board of
Revenue, after a non-disclosure agreement is made with such
auditor as may be prescribed, to assist any authority mentioned
in clauses (b) to (g) of sub-section (1) of section 207.]
(c) where the disclosure is occasioned by the lawful employment
under this Ordinance of any process for the service of any notice
or the recovery of any demand;
(d) to the Auditor-General of Pakistan for the purpose of enabling
the Auditor-General to discharge his functions under the
Constitution;
(e) to any officer appointed by the Auditor-General of Pakistan or
the Commissioner to audit income tax receipts or refunds;
(f ) to any officer of the Federal Government or a Provincial
Government authorised by such Government in this behalf as
may be necessary for the purpose of enabling that Government
to levy or realise any tax imposed by it;
Clause (ba) inserted by the Finance Act, 2025.
(g) to any authority exercising powers under 1[the 2[Federal Excise
Act, 2005], ] the Sales Tax Act, 1990, the Wealth Tax Act, 1963
(XV of 1963), or the Customs Act, 1969 (IV of 1969), as may be
necessary for the purpose of enabling its duty to exercise such
powers;
(h) occasioned by the lawful exercise by a public servant of powers
under the Stamp Act, 1899 (II of 1899) to impound an
insufficiently stamped document;
(i) to the State Bank of Pakistan to enable it to compile financial
statistics of international investment and balance of payment;
(j) as may be required by any order made under sub-section (2) of
section 19 of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 (VII of
1947), or for the purposes of any prosecution for an offence
under section 23 of that Act;
(k) to the Securities and Exchange Commission or the Monopolies
Control Authority for the purposes of the Securities and
Exchange Ordinance, 1969 (XVII of 1969), the Monopolies and
Restrictive Trade Practices (Control and Prevention) Ordinance,
1970 (VI of 1970), the 3[Companies Act, 2017 (XIX of 2017)] or
the Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan Act,
1997, as the case may be;
4[(ka) Employees Old Age Benefit Institution in respect of information
regarding salaries in statements furnished under section 165;]
5[ ]
6[ ]
7[(kc) to National Database and Registration Authority to process and
analyze such data for the purposes of broadening of tax base;]
The words, commas, figures and brackets ” the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 (I of 1944), the
Estate Duty Act, 1950 (X of 1950)” substituted by the Finance Act, 2002.
The words, comma, figure and brackets “Central Excises Act, 1944 (I of 1944)” substituted by the
Finance Act, 2005.
The expression “Companies Ordinance, 1984 (XLVII of 1984)” substituted by the Finance Act,
2021.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2017
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2018
Clause (kb) omitted by the Finance Act, 2022. The omitted clause read as follows:
“(kb) to National Database and Registration Authority for the purpose of broadening of the tax base;”
Clause (kc) added by the Finance Act, 2024.
1[(kd) to the Tax Policy Office for the purpose of processing and
analyzing data for research and policy analysis; and
(ke) to the recognized universities and international donor agencies
subject to the conditions that before sharing, the taxpayer‘s data
shall be anonymized.]
(l) relevant to any inquiry into a charge of misconduct in connection
with income tax proceedings against a legal practitioner or an
accountant;
(m) to a Civil Court in any suit or proceeding to which the Federal
Government or any income tax authority is a party which relates
to any matter arising out of any proceedings under this
Ordinance;
(n) for the purposes of a prosecution for any offence under the
Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 (XLVI of 1860), in respect of any
such statement, returns, accounts, documents, evidence,
affidavit or deposition, or for the purposes of a prosecution for
any offence under this Ordinance;
(o) relevant to any inquiry into the conduct of an official of the
Income Tax Department to any person or officer appointed to
hold such inquiry, or to a Public Service Commission,
established under the Federal Public Service Commission
Ordinance, 1977 (XLV of 1977), when exercising its functions in
relation to any matter arising out of such inquiry;
(p) as may be required by any officer or department of the Federal
Government or of a Provincial Government for the purpose of
investigation into the conduct and affairs of any public servant,
or to a Court in connection with any prosecution of the public
servant arising out of any such investigation;
(q) to an authorised officer of the government of any country outside
Pakistan with which the Government has entered into an
agreement under section 107 for the avoidance of double
taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion as may be required
to be disclosed in pursuance of that agreement; or
Clauses (kd) and ((ke) inserted by the Finance Act, 2025.
(r) to the Federal Tax Ombudsman appointed under the
Establishment of the Office of Federal Tax Ombudsman
Ordinance, 2000 (XXXV of 2000) 1[; or]
2[(s) to the Financial Monitoring Unit (FMU) for the purpose of
performing functions as laid down in the Anti-Money Laundering
Act, 2010 (VII of 2010)] 3[; or
(t) in respect of any high-level public officials and public servants
in BPS-17 and above, their spouses, children or benamidars, or
any person in relation to whom the afore-mentioned persons are
beneficial owner:
Provided that nothing in clause (t) shall apply to those
who are expressly excepted under clause (iv) of sub-section (m)
of section 5 of the National Accountability Ordinance, 1999
(Ordinance No. XVIII of 1999).
Explanation.— "High-level public officials" mean
politically exposed persons as defined by a rule, regulation,
executive order or instrument; or under any law for the time
being in force.]
(4) Nothing in this section shall apply to the production by a public servant
before a Court of any document, declaration, or affidavit filed or the giving of
evidence by a public servant in respect thereof.
(5) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall prevent the 4[Board] from
publishing, with the prior approval of the Federal 5[ ] 6[Government], any such
particulars as are referred to in that sub-section.
(6) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall prevent the Federal
Government from publishing particulars and the amount of tax paid by a holder of
a public office as defined in the 7[National Accountability Bureau Ordinance, 1999
(XVIII of 1999).]
Full stop substituted by semi colon and word “or” through Tax Law (Second Amendment) 2019 dated
26th December, 2019.
2 New clause (s) added through Tax Law(Second Amendment) 2019, dated 26th December, 2019.
Full stop substituted by semi colon and word “or” and clause (t) added by the Finance
(Supplementary) Act, 2022.
The word “Commissioner” substituted by the Finance Act, 2011.
The word “Government” substituted by the Finance Act, 2017.
The expression “Minister-in-charge” substituted by the Finance Act, 2018.
The words, figures brackets and comma “Ehtesab Act, 1997 (IX of 1997)” substituted by the Finance
Act, 2002.
1[(6A) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall prevent the Board from
providing data to any person approved by the Federal Government to process
and analyze such data for broadening of tax base or for checking evasion:
Provided that such data shall be anonymized before transmission to the
person and identifying particulars of the taxpayers shall be kept
confidential.”]
2[(6B) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall prevent the Board from
publishing the names of offshore evaders, in the print and electronic media who
have evaded offshore tax equal to or exceeding rupees two and half million
Rupees.
(6C) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall prevent the Board from
publishing the names of offshore tax enablers, in the print and electronic media
who have enabled offshore tax evasion.]
(7) Any person to whom any information is communicated under this
section, and any person or employee under the first-mentioned person’s control,
shall be, in respect of that information, subject to the same rights, privileges,
obligations, and liabilities as if the person were a public servant and all the
provisions of this Ordinance, so far as may be, shall apply accordingly.
(8) No prosecution may be instituted under this section except with the
previous sanction of the 3[Board].
4[ ]
5[ ]
Inserted by the Finance Supplementary (Amendment) Act, 2018.
Sub-sections (6B) & (6C) inserted through Finance Act, 2019.
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
New section 216A inserted through Finance Act, 2019.
Section 216A omitted by Finance Act, 2022. The omitted section read as follows:
216A. Proceeding against authority and persons.- (1) Subject to section 227, the Board shall
prescribe rules for initiating criminal proceedings against any authority mentioned in section 207 and
officer of the Directorate General mentioned in Part II and Part III of Chapter XI including any person
subordinate to the aforesaid authorities or officers of the Directorates General who wilfully and
deliberately commits or omits an act which results in under benefit or advantage to the authority or
the officer or official or to any other person.
(2) Where proceedings under sub-section (1) have been initiated against the authority or officer or
official, the Board shall simultaneously intimate the relevant Government agency to initiate criminal
proceedings against the person referred to in sub-section (1).
(3) The proceedings under this section shall be without prejudice to any other liability that the
authority or officer or official or the person may incur under any other law for the time being in force.”
217. Forms and notices; authentication of documents.—(1) Forms, notices,
returns, statements, tables and other documents required under this Ordinance
may be in such form as determined by the 1[Board] for the efficient administration
of this Ordinance and publication of such documents in the official Gazette shall
not be required.
(2) The Commissioner shall make the documents referred to in sub-
section (1) available to the public in the manner prescribed.
(3) A notice or other document issued, served or given by the
Commissioner under this Ordinance shall be sufficiently authenticated if the name
or title of the Commissioner, or authorised 2[Officer of Inland Revenue], is printed,
stamped or written on the notice or document3[or if it is computer generated and
bears the authentication in the manner prescribed by the Board].
218. Service of notices and other documents.— (1) Subject to this Ordinance,
any notice, order or requisition required to be served on a resident individual (other
than in a representative capacity) for the purposes of this Ordinance shall be
treated as properly served on the individual if –
(a) personally served on the individual or, in the case of an
individual under a legal disability or a non-resident individual,
the representative of the individual;
(b) sent by registered post or courier service to the place specified
in clause (b) 4[of sub-section (2)] or to the individual’s usual or
last known address in Pakistan; 5[ ]
(c) served on the individual in the manner prescribed for service of a
summons under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (V of 1908)
6[; or]
7[(d) served on the individual electronically in the prescribed
manner.]
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
The words “taxation officer” substituted by the Finance Act, 2010. The substituted provision has been
made effective from 05.06.2010 by sub-clause (77) of clause 8 of the Finance Act, 2010. Earlier the
substitution was made through Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2009 which was re-promulgated
as Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2010 and remained effective till 05.06.2010.
Added by the Finance Act, 2010. The substituted provision has been made effective from 05.06.2010
by sub-clause (77) of clause 8 of the Finance Act, 2010. Earlier the substitution was made through
Finance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2009 which was re-promulgated as Finance (Amendment)
Ordinance, 2010 and remained effective till 05.06.2010.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
The word “or” omitted by the Finance Act 2022.
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act 2018
Added by the Finance Act, 2018.
(2) Subject to this Ordinance, any notice, order or requisition required to be
served on any person (other than a resident individual to whom sub-section (1)
applies) for the purposes of this Ordinance shall be treated as properly served on
the person if –
(a) personally served on the representative of the person;
(b) sent by registered post or courier service to the person’s
registered office or address for service of notices under this
Ordinance in Pakistan, or where the person does not have such
office or address, the notice is sent by registered post to any
office or place of business of the person in Pakistan; 1[ ]
(c) served on the person in the manner prescribed for service of a
summons under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (V of 1908)
2[; or]
3[(d) served on the 4[person] electronically in the prescribed manner.]
(3) Where an association of persons is dissolved, any notice, order or
requisition required to be served under this Ordinance on the association may be
served on any person who was 5[the principal officer or] a member of the
association immediately before such dissolution.
(4) Where section 117 applies, any notice, order or requisition required to
be served under this Ordinance on the person discontinuing the business may be
served on the person personally or on any individual who was the person’s
representative at the time of discontinuance.
(5) The validity of any notice issued under this Ordinance or the validity
of any service of a notice under this Ordinance shall not be called into question
after the return to which the notice relates has been furnished or the notice has
been otherwise complied with.
219. Tax or refund to be computed to the nearest Rupee.—In the determination
of any amount of tax or refund payable under this Ordinance, fractions of a rupee less
than fifty paisa shall be disregarded and fractions of a rupee equal to or exceeding fifty
paisa shall be treated as one rupee.
220. Receipts for amounts paid.— The Commissioner shall give a receipt for
any tax or other amount paid or recovered under this Ordinance.
The word “or” omitted by the Finance Act 2023.
Full stop substituted by the Finance Act 2018.
Added by the Finance Act, 2018.
The word “individual” substituted by the Finance Act 2025.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2002.
221. Rectification of mistakes.— (1) The Commissioner, the Commissioner
(Appeals) or the Appellate Tribunal may, by an order in writing, amend any order
passed by 1[him] to rectify any mistake apparent from the record on 2[his or its] own
motion or any mistake brought to 3[his or its] notice by a taxpayer or, in the case of the
Commissioner (Appeals) or the Appellate Tribunal, the Commissioner.
4[(1A) The Commissioner may, by an order in writing, amend any order
passed under the repealed Ordinance by the Deputy Commissioner, or an Income
Tax Panel, as defined in section 2 of the repealed Ordinance to rectify any mistake
apparent from the record on his own motion or any mistake brought to his notice
by a taxpayer and the provisions of sub-section (2), sub-section (3) and sub-
section (4) shall apply in like manner as these apply to an order under sub-section
(1).]
(2) No order under sub-section (1) which has the effect of increasing an
assessment, reducing a refund or otherwise applying adversely to the taxpayer
shall be made unless the taxpayer has been given a reasonable opportunity of
being heard.
(3) Where a mistake apparent on the record is brought to the notice of the
Commissioner 5[or] Commissioner (Appeals) 6[ ], as the case may be, and no order
has been made under sub-section (1) before the expiration of the financial year
next following the date on which the mistake was brought to their notice, the
mistake shall be treated as rectified and all the provisions of this Ordinance shall
have effect accordingly.
(4) No order under sub-section (1) may be made after five years from the
date of the order sought to be rectified.
222. Appointment of expert. — 7[(1)] The Commissioner may appoint any
expert as the Commissioner considers necessary for the purposes of this
Ordinance, including for the purposes of audit or valuation.
The word “them” substituted by the Finance Act, 2003.
The word “their” substituted by the Finance Act, 2003.
The word “their” substituted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003. Earlier sub-section (1A) was inserted by S.R.O. 633(I)/2002, dated
14.09.2002 which stands rescinded by SRO 608(I)/2003, dated 24.06.2003 with effect from
01.07.2003. The said sub-section (1A) read as follows:
“(1A) The Commissioner may, by an order in writing, amend any order passed under the
repealed Ordinance by the Deputy Commissioner, or an Income Tax Panel, as defined in section 2
of the repealed Ordinance.”
Comma substituted by the Finance Act, 2003.
The words “or the Appellate Tribunal” omitted by the Finance Act, 2003.
The existing provision re-numbered as sub-section (1) thereof, by the Finance Act 2025.
1[(2) The Board may also appoint as many auditors on contractual basis or
through a third-party arrangement, as the case may be, as it deems fit for carrying
out the purposes of this Ordinance:
Provided that the total number of auditors appointed under this section shall
not be more than two thousand.]
2[222A. Fee and service charges.- 3[(1)] The 4[Board with the approval of Federal
Minister-in-charge] may, be notification in the official Gazette, and subject to such
conditions, limitations or restrictions as it may deem fit to impose, levy fee and
services charges for valuation or in respect of any other service or control
mechanism provided by any formation under the control of the Board, including
ventures of public-private partnership at such rates as may be specified in the
notification.]
5[(2) The Board may authorize and prescribe the manner in which fee and
service charges collected including by ventures of public-private partnership under
this section are expended.]
223. Appearance by authorised representative. — (1) Any taxpayer who is
entitled or required to attend before the Commissioner, the Commissioner
(Appeals) or the Appellate Tribunal in connection with any proceeding under this
Ordinance may, except when required under section 176 to attend personally,
attend by an authorised representative.
(2) For the purposes of this section and subject to sub-section (3), an
authorised representative of a taxpayer shall be a person who is a representative
of the person under section 172 and any of the following persons, namely:–
(a) A relative of the taxpayer;
(b) a current full-time employee of the taxpayer;
(c) any officer of a scheduled bank with which the taxpayer
maintains a current account or has other regular dealings;
(d) any legal practitioner entitled to practice in any Civil Court in
Pakistan;
(e) any accountant; or
Sub-section (2) added by the Finance Act 2025.
New section 222A added through Finance Act, 2019.
Re-numbered as sub-section (1) of section 222A by the by the Finance Act, 2021.
The words “Federal Government” substituted through Tax Laws (Second Amendment), 2019 dated
26th December, 2019.
Sub-section (2) added by the Finance Act, 2021.
(f) any income tax practitioner.
(3) For the purposes of this section —
(a) no person who has been dismissed or removed from service in
the Income Tax Department shall be entitled to represent a
taxpayer under sub-section (1);
(b) no person having resigned from service after having been
employed in the Income Tax Department for not less than two
years shall be entitled to represent a taxpayer under sub-section
(1) for a period of two years from the date of resignation;
(c) no person having retired from service in the Income Tax
Department shall be entitled to represent a taxpayer under sub-
section (1) for a period of one year from the date of retirement in
any case in which the person had made or approved, as the case
may be, any order of assessment, refund or appeal within one year
before the date of retirement; or
(d) no person who has become insolvent shall be entitled to
represent a taxpayer under sub-section (1) for so long as the
insolvency continues;
(e) no person who has been convicted of an offence in relation to any
income tax proceedings under this Ordinance shall be entitled to
represent a taxpayer under sub-section (1) for such period as the
Commissioner may, by order in writing, determine.
(4) Where any legal practitioner or accountant is found guilty of
misconduct in a professional capacity by any authority entitled to take disciplinary
action against the legal practitioner or accountant, an order passed by that
authority shall have effect in relation to any right to represent a taxpayer under
sub-section (1) as it has in relation to the person’s right to practice as a legal
practitioner or accountant.
(5) Where any person (other than a person to whom sub-section (4)
applies) is found guilty of misconduct in relation to any income tax proceeding, the
Commissioner may, by an order in writing, direct that the person cease to
represent a taxpayer under sub-section (1) before the Commissioner,
Commissioner (Appeals) or Appellate Tribunal.
(6) The Commissioner shall not make an order under clause (e) of sub-
section (3) or sub-section (5) in respect of any person, unless the Commissioner
has given the person a reasonable opportunity to be heard.
(7) Any person against whom an order under clause (e) of sub-section (3) or
sub-section (5) has been made may, within thirty days of service of notice of the
order, appeal to the 1[Board] to have the order cancelled.
(8) The 2[Board] may admit an appeal after the expiration of the period
specified in sub-section (7) if satisfied that the appellant was prevented by
sufficient cause from lodging the appeal within the period.
(9) No order made under clause (e) of sub-section (3) or sub-section (5)
shall take effect until thirty days after notice of the order is served on the person
or, where an appeal has been lodged under sub-section (7), until the disposal of
the appeal.
(10) The 3[Board] may make rules under section 4[237]for the registration
of income tax practitioners and related matters, including establishing a code of
conduct for such practitioners.
(11) In this section –
“accountant” means –
(a) a chartered accountant within the meaning of the Chartered
Accountants Ordinance, 1961 (X of 1961);
(b) a cost and management accountant within the meaning of the Cost
and Management Accountants Act, 1966 (XIV of 1966); or
(c) a member of any association of accountants recognised for the
purposes of this section by the 5[Board]; and
“income tax practitioner” means a person who is registered as such by
the 6[Board], being a person who possesses such qualifications as
may be prescribed for the purposes of this section or who has retired
after putting in satisfactory service in the Income Tax Department for
a period of not less than ten years in a post or posts not below that of
Income Tax Officer.
224. Proceedings under the Ordinance to be judicial proceedings. —Any
proceedings under this Ordinance before the Commissioner, Commissioner
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
The figure “232” substituted by the Finance Act, 2002.
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
(Appeals) or Appellate Tribunal shall be treated as judicial proceedings within the
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 (Act XLV of
1860), and for the purposes of section 196 of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 (Act
XLV of 1860).
225. Proceedings against companies under liquidation. —Notwithstanding
anything contained in 1[section 310 of the Companies Act, 2017 (XIX of 2017)],
leave of the Court shall not be required for continuing with or commencing any
proceeding under this Ordinance against a company in respect of which a winding
up order has been made or Provisional Liquidator appointed.
226. Computation of limitation period.—In computing the period of limitation,
there shall be excluded –
(a) in the case of an appeal or an application under this Ordinance, the
day on which the order complained of was served and, if the taxpayer
was not furnished with a copy of the order when the notice of the order
was served on the taxpayer, the time requisite for obtaining a copy of
such order; and
2[(b) in the case of an assessment or other proceeding under this
Ordinance,—
(i) the period, if any, for which such proceedings were stayed by
any Court, Appellate Tribunal or any other authority; or
(ii) the period, if any, for which any proceeding for the tax year
remained pending before any Court, Appellate Tribunal 3[,
Alternate Dispute Resolution Committee (ADRC)] or any other
authority.]
227. Bar of suits in Civil Courts.— 4[(1)] No suit or other legal proceeding shall
be brought in any Civil Court against any order made 5[or any notice issued] under
this Ordinance, and no prosecution, suit or other proceedings shall be made
The expression “section 316 of the Companies Ordinance, 1984 (XLVII of 1984)” substituted by the
Finance Act, 2021.
Clause (b) substituted by the Finance Act, 2010. The substituted clause (b) read as follows:
“(b) in the case of an assessment or other proceeding under this Ordinance, the period, if any,
for which such proceedings were stayed by any Court, Appellate Tribunal or any other
authority.”
Expression inserted by the Finance Act 2025.
Re-numbered as sub-section (1) by the Finance Act, 2010.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2018.
against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done
under this Ordinance or any rules or orders made 1[or notices issued] thereunder.
2[“Explanation.—For the removal of doubt, it is clarified that Civil Court
includes any court exercising power of the civil court.”]
3[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being
in force, no investigation or inquiry shall be undertaken or initiated by any
governmental agency against any officer or official for anything done in his official
capacity under this Ordinance, rules, instructions or direction made or issued
there-under without the prior approval of the Board.]
4[227A. Reward to officers and officials of Inland Revenue.— (1) In cases 5[(i)]
involving concealment or evasion of income tax and other taxes, cash reward shall,
only after realization of part or whole of the taxes involved in such cases, be
sanctioned to the officers and officials of Inland Revenue for their meritorious
conduct in such cases 6[and (ii) for other meritorious services] and to the informer
providing credible information leading to such detection.
(2) The Board may, by notification in the official Gazette, prescribe the
procedure in this behalf and also specify the apportionment of reward sanctioned
under this section for individual performance or to collective welfare of the officers
and officials of Inland Revenue.]
7[227B. Reward to whistleblowers.—(1) The Board may sanction reward to
whistleblowers in cases of concealment or evasion of income tax, fraud, corruption or
misconduct providing credible information leading to such detection of tax.
(2) The Board may, by notification in the official Gazette, prescribe the
procedure in this behalf and also specify the apportionment of reward sanctioned
under this section for whistleblowers.
(3) The claim for reward by the whistleblower shall be rejected, if—
(a) the information provided is of no value;
8[(aa) the information is not supported by any evidence;]
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2018.
Added by the Finance Act, 2018.
Added by the Finance Act, 2010.
Added by the Finance Act, 2013.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2017.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2017
inserted by the Finance Act, 2015.
inserted by the Finance Act, 2017.
(b) the Board already had the information;
(c) the information was available in public records; or
(d) no collection of taxes is made from the information provided
from which the Board can pay the reward.
(4) For the purpose of this section, “whistleblower” means a person who
reports concealment or evasion of income tax leading to detection or collection of
taxes, fraud, corruption or misconduct, to the competent authority having power to
take action against the person or an income tax authority committing fraud,
corruption, misconduct, or involved in concealment or evasion of taxes.”]
1[227BA. Reward and benefits for certain persons.— (1) The Board may
sanction rewards to e-intermediaries for filing of returns of new taxpayers.
(2) The Board with the approval of Federal Minister in-charge may announce
benefits, rebates, tax credits, allowances and any other incentive in cash or
otherwise for class or classes of persons.
(3) The Board with the approval of the Federal Minister in-charge may, by
notification in the official Gazette, prescribe the procedure in this behalf and also
notify the class or classes of persons eligible under this section. The provisions of
this section shall take effect from the date notified by the Board.]
2[ ]
Section 227BA inserted by the Finance Act, 2021.
Section 227C omitted through Finance Act 2019, omitted section read as follows:-
227C. Restriction on purchase of certain assets.─ Notwithstanding anything contained in any law,
for the time being in force,—
(a) any application for booking, registration or purchase of a new locally manufactured motor
vehicle or for first registration of an imported vehicle shall not be accepted or processed by any
vehicle registering authority of Excise and Taxation Department or a manufacturer of a motor
vehicle respectively, unless the person is a filer.; and
(b) any application or request by a person to any authority responsible for registering, recording or
attesting transfer of any immovable property, exceeding five million rupees, for registering or
attesting the transfer shall not be accepted or processed by such authority, unless the person is a
filer2[:]” ]
2[“Provided that the provisions of clause (a) shall not apply in respect of,─
2[(i) locally manufactured motor vehicle; or]
(ii) a person holding a Pakistan origin card or a national identity card for overseas
Pakistanis 2[or a non-resident Pakistani citizen holding international passport] who
produces a certificate from a scheduled bank of receipt of foreign exchange remitted
from outside Pakistan through normal banking channels during a period of sixty
days prior to the date of booking, registration or purchase of motor vehicle:
Provided further that the provisions of clause (b) shall not apply to,─
(i) a legal heir acquiring property in inheritance; or
1[227D.- Automated impersonal tax regime.- (1) The Board may design an
alternate impersonal taxation regime whereby personal interaction will be
minimized.
(2) The Board may, by notification in the official Gazette, prescribe the
procedure in this behalf.
(3) This section shall be applicable only for low risk and compliant
taxpayers as may be prescribed.]
2[227E. E-hearing.— (1) The Board may design and prescribe e-hearing module
for the purpose of conducting hearings, granting opportunity of being heard and
electronically receiving any information for the purpose of this Ordinance.
(2) The recording of e-hearing proceedings shall be admissible as evidence
before any forum or court of law for the purpose of this Ordinance.
(3) The Board may make rules for the purpose of this section.]
