PART V
HEAD OF INCOME: CAPITAL GAINS
37. Capital gains.— (1) Subject to this Ordinance, a gain arising on the
disposal of a capital asset by a person in a tax year, other than a gain that is
exempt from tax under this Ordinance, shall be chargeable to tax in that year under
the head “Capital Gains”.
1[ ]
2[(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), gain arising on
disposal of immovable property situated in Pakistan, to a person in a tax year shall
be chargeable to tax under the head capital gains at the rates specified in Division
VIII of Part I of the First Schedule.]
(2) Subject to 3[sub-section (4)], the gain arising on the disposal of a
capital asset by a person shall be computed in accordance with the following
formula, namely:–
A – B
where —
A is the consideration received by the person on disposal of the asset; and
B is the cost of the asset.
4[ ]
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2012.
Sub-section (1A) substituted by the Finance Act, 2022. Substituted sub-section (1A) reads as
follows:
“(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (3) gain 2[under sub-section
(3A) 2[ ] ] 2[ ] by a person in a tax year, shall be chargeable to tax in that year under the head Capital
Gains at the rates specified in Division VIII of Part I of the First Schedule.”
The expression “sub-sections (3) and” omitted by the Finance Act, 2022.
Sub-section (3) omitted by the Finance Act, 2022. Omitted sub-section (3) reads as follows:
“ (3) Where a capital asset has been held by a person for more than one year,4[other than shares of
public companies including the vouchers of Pakistan Telecommunication Corporation,
modaraba certificates or any instrument of redeemable capital as defined in the 4[Companies
Act, 2017 (XIX of 2017)], ] the amount of any gain arising on disposal of the asset shall be
computed in accordance with the following formula, namely: —
A x ¾
where A is the amount of the gain determined under sub-section (2).”
1[ ]
2[ ]
3[ ]
1 The sub-section (3A) substituted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020 the substituted
sub-section read as follows:
(3A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), the amount of any gain arising on
disposal of immovable property being an open plot shall be computed in accordance with the formula
specified in the Table below, namely:-
TABLE
S.No. Holding Period Gain
(1) (2) (3)
1. Where the holding period of open plot does not exceed one year A
2. Where the holding period of open plot exceeds one year but does not A x 3/4
exceed eight years
3. Where the holding period of open plot exceeds eight years 0
where A is the amount of the gain determined under sub-section (2).
Sub-sections (3A) omitted by the Finance Act, 2022. Omitted sub-section reads as follows:
(3A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), the amount of any gain arising
on disposal of an immovable property shall be computed in accordance with the formula specified
in the Table below, namely:-
TABLE
S.No. Holding period Gain
(1) (2) (3)
1. Where the holding period of an immovable property A
does not exceed one year
2. Where the holding period of an immovable property A x 3/4
exceeds one year but does not exceed two years
3. Where the holding period of an immovable property A x 1/2
exceeds two years but does not exceed three
years
4. Where the holding period of an immovable property A x 1/4
exceeds three years but does not exceed four
years
5. Where the holding period of an immovable property 0
exceeds four years
where A is the amount of gain determined under sub-section (2).]
Sub-section(3B) omitted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020. The omitted clause read
as follows: (3B) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), the amount of any gain arising
on disposal of immovable property being a constructed property shall be computed in accordance with
the formula specified in the Table below, namely:-
TABLE
S.No. Holding Period Gain
(1) (2) (3)
1. Where the holding period of constructed property does not exceed one year A
2. Where the holding period of constructed property exceeds one year but A x 3/4
does not exceed four years
3. Where the holding period of constructed property exceeds four years 0
where A is the amount of the gain determined under sub-section (2).]
(4) For the purposes of determining component B of the formula in sub-
section (2), no amount shall be included in the cost of a capital asset for any
expenditure incurred by a person –
(a) that is or may be deducted under another provision of this
Chapter; or
(b) that is referred to in section 21.
1[ ]
2[ ]
(5) In this section, “capital asset” means property of any kind held by a
person, whether or not connected with a business, but does not include —
3[(a) any stock-in-trade 4[ ], consumable stores or raw materials held
for the purpose of business;]
(b) any property with respect to which the person is entitled to a
depreciation deduction under section 22 or amortisation
deduction under section 24; 5[or]
6[ ]
(d) any movable property 7[excluding capital assets specified in
sub-section (5) of section 38] held for personal use by the
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Sub-section (4A) omitted through Finance Act, 2022. Omitted sub-section read as follows:
“(4A) Where the capital asset becomes the property of the person —
(a) under a gift 2[from a relative as defined in sub section (5) of section 85], bequest or will;
(b) by succession, inheritance or devolution;
(c) a distribution of assets on dissolution of an association of persons; or
(d) on distribution of assets on liquidation of a company,
the fair market value of the asset, on the date of its transfer or acquisition by the person shall be
treated to be the cost of the asset 2[:
Provided that, if the capital asset acquired through gift is disposed of within two years of
acquisition and the Commissioner is satisfied that such gift arrangement is a part of tax avoidance
scheme, then the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 79 shall apply for the purpose of
determining the cost of asset in the hands of recipient of the gift.]
The brackets and words “(a) any stock-in-trade;” substituted by the Finance Act, 2002
The brackets and words “(not being stocks and shares)” omitted by the Finance Act, 2010.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2012.
Clause (c) omitted by the Finance Act, 2012. Omitted clause (c) read as follows:-
“(c) any immovable property; or”
The brackets, commas and words “(including wearing apparel, jewellery, or furniture)” substituted
by the Finance Act, 2003.
person or any member of the person’s family dependent on the
person1[.]
2[ ]
3[(6) The person acquiring a capital asset, being shares of a company, shall
deduct advance adjustable tax from the gross amount paid 4[or payable] as
consideration for the shares 5[at the time of payment or at the time of registration
of shares by the Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan or by the State
Bank of Pakistan, whichever is earlier] at the rate of ten percent of the fair market
value of the shares which shall be paid to the Commissioner by way of credit to
the Federal Government, within fifteen days of the payment.
(7) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 68, the value of shares, for the
purpose of sub-section (6), shall be the fair market value, as prescribed for sub-
section (4) of section 101A, without reduction of liabilities.
(8) The Commissioner may, on application made by the person acquiring of
the shares, and after making such inquiry as the Commissioner thinks fit, allow to
make the payment, without deduction of tax or deduction of tax at a reduced rate.
(9) The provisions of sections 161, 162, entry No. 15 of the Table in section
182, clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 191 and section 205 shall mutatis
mutandis apply to the tax deductible and payable under this section.
(10) The person disposing of the capital asset, being shares of a company,
shall furnish to the Commissioner within thirty days of the transaction of disposal,
the prescribed information or documents, in a statement as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Commissioner may, by notice in writing, require the
said person, to furnish information, documents and statement within a period of
less than thirty days as specified in the notice.]
The comma and word “; or” substituted by the Finance Act, 2002
Clause (e) omitted by the Finance Act, 2001. The omitted clause (e) read as follows:
“(e) any modaraba certificate or any instrument of redeemable capital listed on any stock exchange
or shares of a public company.”
3 Sub-sections (6) to (10) added by the Finance (Supplementary) Act, 2023 (X of 2023) dated
23.02.2023.
Words inserted by the Finance Act, 2024.
Expression inserted by the Finance Act, 2024.
1[37A. Capital gain on disposal of securities. — (1) The capital gain arising
on or after the first day of July 2010, from disposal of securities2[ ]3[, other than a
gain that is exempt from tax under this Ordinance], shall be chargeable to tax at
the rates specified in Division VII of Part I of the First Schedule:
4[ ]
Provided 5[ ] that this section shall not apply to a banking
company and an insurance company 6[:
7[Provided further that this section shall not apply to the disposal
of shares –
(i) of a listed company made otherwise than through registered
stock exchange and which are not settled through NCCPL;
(ii) through initial public offer during listing process except
where the detail of such disposal is furnished to NCCPL for
computation of capital gains and tax thereon under this
section,
and the provisions of section 37 shall apply on such disposal of
shares of a listed company or disposal of shares through initial public
offer, accordingly.]]
8[(1A) The gain arising on the disposal of a security by a person shall be
computed in accordance with the following formula, namely: —
A – B
Where —
(i) ‘A’ is the consideration received by the person on disposal of
the security; and
Added by the Finance Act, 2010.
Omitted by Finance Act, 2015. The omitted words read as follows:-
“ held for a period of less than a year,”
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2012.
The First proviso omitted by Finance Act, 2014. The omitted proviso read as follows:
“Provided that this section shall not apply if the securities are held for a period of more than a
year.”
The word “further” omitted by Finance Act, 2014
6 Full stop substituted with colon and new proviso added by the by the Finance (Supplementary) Act,
2023 (X of 2023) dated 23.02.2023.
7 Second proviso substituted by the by the Finance Act, 2023. The substituted second proviso read as
follows:
“Provided further that this section shall not apply to the disposal of shares of a listed company made
otherwise than through registered stock exchange and which are not settled through NCCPL and
the provisions of section 37 shall apply on such disposal of shares of a listed company, accordingly.”
Inserted by the Finance Act,2012.
(ii) ‘B’ is the cost of acquisition of the security.]
(2) The holding period of a security, for the purposes of this section, shall
be reckoned from the date of acquisition (whether before, on or after the thirtieth
day of June, 2010) to the date of disposal of such security falling after the thirtieth
day of June, 2010.
(3) For the purposes of this section “security” means share of a public
company, voucher of Pakistan Telecommunication Corporation, Modaraba
Certificate, an instrument of redeemable capital1[,debt Securities] 2[, unit of
exchange traded fund] and derivative products.
3[(3A) For the purpose of this section, “debt securities” means -
(a) Corporate Debt Securities such as Term Finance Certificates
(TFCs), Sukuk Certificates (Sharia Compliant Bonds),
Registered Bonds, Commercial Papers, Participation Term
Certificates (PTCs) and all kinds of debt instruments issued by
any Pakistani or foreign company or corporation registered in
Pakistan; and
(b) Government Debt Securities such as Treasury Bills (T-bills),
Federal Investment Bonds (FIBs), Pakistan Investment Bonds
(PIBs), Foreign Currency Bonds, Government Papers,
Municipal Bonds, Infrastructure Bonds and all kinds of debt
instruments issued by Federal Government, Provincial
Governments, Local Authorities and other statutory bodies.]
4[“Explanation: For removal of doubt it is clarified that derivative
products include future commodity contracts entered into by the
members of Pakistan Mercantile Exchange whether or not
settled by physical delivery.”]
5[(3B) For the purpose of this section, “shares of a public company”
shall be considered as security if such company is a public company at the time of
disposal of such shares.]
(4) Gain under this section shall be treated as a separate block of income.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Ordinance, where a person
sustains a loss on disposal of securities in a tax year, the loss shall be set off only
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2014.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2021.
The sub-section (3A) inserted by the Finance Act, 2014.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2016.
5 New sub-section (3B) inserted through Finance Act, 2020 dated 30th June, 2020
against the gain of the person from any other securities chargeable to tax under
this section and no loss shall be carried forward to the subsequent tax year 1[:]
2[Provided that so much of the loss sustained on disposal of securities in tax
year 20l9 and onwards that has not been set off against the gain of the person
from disposal of securities chargeable to tax under this section shall be carried
forward to the following tax year and set off only against the gain of the person
from disposal of securities chargeable to tax under this section, but no such loss
shall be carried forward to more than three tax years immediately succeeding the
tax year for which the loss was first computed.]
3[(6) To carry out purpose of this section, the Board may prescribe rules.]
38. Deduction of losses in computing the amount chargeable under the
head “Capital Gains”.— (1) Subject to this Ordinance, in computing the amount
of a person chargeable to tax under the head “Capital Gains” for a tax year, a
deduction shall be allowed for any loss on the disposal of a capital asset by the
person in the year.
(2) No loss shall be deducted under this section on the disposal of a
capital asset where a gain on the disposal of such asset would not be chargeable
to tax.
(3) The loss arising on the disposal of a capital asset by a person shall
be computed in accordance with the following formula, namely: —
A – B
where —
A is the cost of the asset; and
B is the consideration received by the person on disposal of the asset.
(4) The provisions of sub-section (4) of section 37 shall apply in
determining component A of the formula in sub-section (3).
(5) No loss shall be recognized under this Ordinance on the disposal of
the following capital assets, namely:—
(a) A painting, sculpture, drawing or other work of art;
(b) jewellery;
(c) a rare manuscript, folio or book;
(d) a postage stamp or first day cover;
(e) a coin or medallion; or
(f) an antique.
Full stop substituted by colon through Finance Supplementary (Second Amendment) Act, 2019
New Proviso added through Finance Supplementary (Second Amendment) Act, 2019
Added by the Finance Act, 2021.
