Division IV
Tax Accounting
32. Method of accounting.—1[(1) Subject to this Ordinance, a person’s income
chargeable to tax shall be computed in accordance with the method of accounting
regularly employed by such person.]
(2) Subject to sub-section (3), a company shall account for income
chargeable to tax under the head “Income from Business” on an accrual basis,
while other persons may account for such income on a cash or accrual basis.
(3) The 2[Board] may prescribe that any class of persons shall account
for income chargeable to tax under the head “Income from Business” on a cash or
accrual basis.
(4) A person may apply, in writing, for a change in the person’s method
of accounting and the Commissioner may, by 3[order] in writing, approve such an
application but only if satisfied that the change is necessary to clearly reflect the
person’s income chargeable to tax under the head “Income from Business”.
(5) If a person’s method of accounting has changed, the person shall
make adjustments to items of income, deduction, or credit, or to any other items
affected by the change so that no item is omitted and no item is taken into account
more than once.
33. Cash-basis accounting.—A person accounting for income chargeable to
tax under the head “Income from Business” on a cash basis shall derive income
when it is received and shall incur expenditure when it is paid.
34. Accrual-basis accounting.—(1) A person accounting for income
chargeable to tax under the head “Income from Business” on an accrual basis shall
derive income when it is due to the person and shall incur expenditure when it is
payable by the person.
(2) Subject to this Ordinance, an amount shall be due to a person when
the person becomes entitled to receive it even if the time for discharge of the
entitlement is postponed or the amount is payable by instalments.
Sub-section (1) substituted by the Finance Act, 2003. The substituted sub-section (1) read as follows:
“(1) A person’s income chargeable to tax under the head “Income from Business” shall be
computed in accordance with the method of accounting regularly employed by the person.”
The words “Central Board of Revenue” substituted by the Finance Act, 2007.
Substituted for the word “notice” by the Finance Act, 2003.
(3) Subject to this Ordinance, an amount shall be payable by a person
when all the events that determine liability have occurred and the amount of the
liability can be determined with reasonable accuracy 1[ ].
2[ ]
(5) Where a person has been allowed a deduction for any expenditure
incurred in deriving income chargeable to tax under the head “Income from
Business” and the person has not paid the liability or a part of the liability to which
the deduction relates within three years of the end of the tax year in which the
deduction was allowed, the unpaid amount of the liability shall be chargeable to
tax under the head “Income from Business” in the first tax year following the end
of the three years.
3[(5A) Where a person has been allowed a deduction in respect of a trading
liability and such person has derived any benefit in respect of such trading liability,
the value of such benefit shall be chargeable to tax under 4[the] head “Income from
Business” for the tax year in which such benefit is received.]
(6) Where an unpaid liability is chargeable to tax as a result of the
application of sub-section (5) and the person subsequently pays the liability or a
part of the liability, the person shall be allowed a deduction for the amount paid in
the tax year in which the payment is made.
35. Stock-in-trade.— (1) For the purposes of determining a person’s income
chargeable to tax under the head “Income from Business” for a tax year, the cost
of stock-in-trade disposed of by the person in the year shall be computed in
accordance with the following formula, namely:—
(A + B) – C
where —
A is the opening value of the person’s stock-in-trade for the year;
B is cost of stock-in-trade acquired by the person in the year; and
The comma and words “, but not before economic performance occurs” omitted by the Finance Act, 2004.
Sub-section (4) omitted by the Finance Act, 2004. The omitted sub-section (4) read as follows:
“(4) For the purposes of sub-section (3), economic performance shall occur -
(a) in the case of the acquisition of services or assets, at the time the services or
assets are provided;
(b) in the case of the use of assets, at the time the assets are used; and
(c) in any other case, at the time payment is made in full satisfaction of the
liability.”
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2003.
Inserted by the Finance Act, 2005.
C is the closing value of stock-in-trade for the year.
(2) The opening value of stock-in-trade of a person for a tax year shall be —
(a) the closing value of the person’s stock-in-trade at the end of the
previous year; or
(b) where the person commenced to carry on business in the year,
the fair market value of any stock-in-trade acquired by the
person prior to the commencement of the business.
(3) The fair market value of stock-in-trade referred to in clause (b) of sub-
section (2) shall be determined at the time the stock-in-trade is ventured in the
business.
(4) The closing value of a person’s stock-in-trade for a tax year shall be
the lower of cost or 1[net realisable]value of the person’s stock-in-trade on hand at
the end of the year.
(5) A person accounting for income chargeable to tax under the head
“Income from Business” on a cash basis may compute the person’s cost of stock-
in-trade on the prime-cost method or absorption-cost method, and a person
accounting for such income on an accrual basis shall compute the person’s cost
of stock-in-trade on the absorption-cost method.
(6) Where particular items of stock-in-trade are not readily identifiable, a
person may account for that stock on the first-in-first-out method or the average-
cost method but, once chosen, a stock valuation method may be changed only
with the written permission of the Commissioner and in accordance with any
conditions that the Commissioner may impose.
(7) In this section, —
“absorption-cost method” means the generally accepted accounting
principle under which the cost of an item of stock-in-trade is the sum
of direct material costs, direct labour costs, and factory overhead
costs;
“average-cost method” means the generally accepted accounting
principle under which the valuation of stock-in-trade is based on a
weighted average cost of units on hand;
“direct labour costs” means labour costs directly related to the
manufacture or production of stock-in-trade;
Substituted for the words “fair market” by the Finance Act, 2002
“direct material costs” means the cost of materials that become an
integral part of the stock-in-trade manufactured or produced, or which
are consumed in the manufacturing or production process;
“factory overhead costs” means the total costs of manufacturing or
producing stock-in-trade, other than direct labour and direct material
costs;
“first-in-first-out method” means the generally accepted accounting
principle under which the valuation of stock-in-trade is based on the
assumption that stock is sold in the order of its acquisition;
“prime-cost method” means the generally accepted accounting
principle under which the cost of stock-in-trade is the sum of direct
material costs, direct labour costs, and variable factory overhead
costs;
“stock-in-trade” means anything produced, manufactured, purchased,
or otherwise acquired for manufacture, sale or exchange, and any
materials or supplies to be consumed in the production or
manufacturing process, but does not include stocks or shares; and
“variable factory overhead costs” means those factory overhead costs
which vary directly with changes in volume of stock-in-trade
manufactured or produced.
36. Long-term contracts.— (1) A person accounting for income chargeable to
tax under the head “Income from Business” on an accrual basis shall compute
such income arising for a tax year under a long-term contract on the basis of the
percentage of completion method.
(2) The percentage of completion of a long-term contract in a tax year
shall be determined by comparing the total costs allocated to the contract and
incurred before the end of the year with the estimated total contract costs as
determined at the commencement of the contract.
(3) In this section, —
“long-term contract” means a contract for manufacture, installation, or
construction, or, in relation to each, the performance of related
services, which is not completed within the tax year in which work
under the contract commenced, other than a contract estimated to be
completed within six months of the date on which work under the
contract commenced; and
“percentage of completion method” means the generally accepted
accounting principle under which revenue and expenses arising under
a long-term contract are recognised by reference to the stage of
completion of the contract, as modified by sub-section (2).
