Division III
Income Splitting
90. Transfers of assets. — (1) For the purposes of this Ordinance and subject
to sub-section (2), where there has been a revocable transfer of an asset, any
income arising from the asset shall be treated as the income of the transferor and
not of the transferee.
(2) Sub-section (1) shall not apply to any income derived by a person by
virtue of a transfer that is not revocable during the lifetime of the person and the
transferor derives no direct or indirect benefit from such income.
(3) For the purposes of this Ordinance, where there has been a transfer
of an asset but the asset remains the property of the transferor, any income arising
from the asset shall be treated as the income of the transferor.
(4) For the purposes of this Ordinance and subject to sub-section (5), any
income arising from any asset transferred by a person directly or indirectly to—
(a) the person’s spouse or minor child; or
(b) any other person for the benefit of a person or persons referred
to in clause (a),
shall be treated as the income of the transferor.
(5) Sub-section (4) shall not apply to any transfer made —
(a) for adequate consideration; or
(b) in connection with an agreement to live apart.
(6) For the purposes of clause (a) of sub-section (5), a transfer shall not
be treated as made for adequate consideration if the transferor has provided, by
way of loan or otherwise, to the transferee, directly or indirectly, with the funds for
the acquisition of the asset.
(7) Sub-section (5) does not apply where the transferor fails to produce
evidence of the transfer of the asset by way of its registration or mutation in the
relevant record and the income arising from the asset shall be treated as the
income of the transferor for the purposes of this Ordinance.
(8) For the purposes of this section, —
(a) a transfer of an asset shall be treated as revocable if —
(i) there is any provision for the re-transfer, directly or
indirectly, of the whole or any part of the asset to the
transferor; or
(ii) the transferor has, in any way, the right to resume power,
directly or indirectly, over the whole or any part of the
asset;
(b) “minor child” shall not include a married daughter; and
(c) “transfer” includes any disposition, settlement, trust, covenant,
agreement or arrangement.
91. Income of a minor child.— (1) Any income of a minor child for a tax year
chargeable under the head "Income from Business" shall be chargeable to tax as the
income of the parent of the child with the highest taxable income for that year.
(2) Sub-section (1) shall not apply to the income of a minor child from a
business acquired by the child through an inheritance.
